<TITLE>Society of Jesus</TITLE>
<TOPIC>Society of Jesus</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>Jesuits</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>Roman Catholicism</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>history</TOPIC>
<TEXT>
The Society of Jesus, commonly known as the Jesuits, is a Roman Catholic order. 
It was founded in 1534 by a group of University of Paris graduate students led 
by Iñigo Lopez de Loyola (Ignatius of Loyola).

Foundation

On August 15, 1534, Ignatius and six other students (Peter Faber, Francis 
Xavier, Alfonso Salmeron, Jacob Laines, and Nicholas Bobedilla, Spaniards, and 
Simon Rodrigues, a Portuguese) met in Montmartre outside Paris, probably near 
the modern Chapel of St Denys, Rue Antoinette, and binding themselves by a vow 
of poverty and chastity, founded the Society of Jesus- to "enter upon hospital 
and missionary work in Jerusalem, or to go without questioning wherever the pope
might direct".

In 1537 they travelled to Italy to seek papal approval for their order. Pope 
Paul III gave them a commendation, and permitted them to be ordained priests. 
They were ordained at Venice by the bishop of Arbe (June 24). They devoted 
themselves to preaching and charitable work in Italy, as the renewed war between
the emperor, Venice, the pope and the Seljuk Turks rendered any journey to 
Jerusalem inadvisable.

With Faber and Lainez, Ignatius made his way to Rome in October, 1538, to have 
the pope approve the constitution of the new order. A congregation of cardinals 
reported favorably upon the constitution presented, and Paul III confirmed the 
order through the bull "Regimini militantis" (September 27, 1540), but limited 
the number of its members to sixty. This limitation was removed through the 
bull "Injunctum nobis" (March 14, 1543). Ignatius was chosen as the first 
superior-general. He sent his companions as missionaries around Europe to create
schools,colleges, and seminaries.

Ignatius wrote the Jesuit Constitutions, adopted in 1554, which created a 
monarchical organization and stressed absolute self-abnegation and obedience to 
Pope and superiors ("perinde ac cadaver", "[well-disciplined] like a corpse" as 
Ignatius put it). His main principle became the Jesuit motto: "Ad Majorem Dei 
Gloriam" ("all things for the greater glory of God").

Early works

The Jesuits were founded as part of the Catholic Reformation, a reactionary 
movement to the Protestant Reformation, whose teachings were sweeping Catholic 
Europe. They preached total obedience to scripture and Church doctrine, Ignatius
of Loyola himself declaring: "I will believe that the white that I see is black if
the hierarchical Church so defines it."

One of the main tools of the Jesuits was the Ignatian retreat. In this, people 
would come together under a priest for a week or longer, remaining silent while 
attending conferences and undergoing exercises to make themselves better people,
which would include conferences and meditations on themes such as our imminent 
deaths and other issues.

They also preached that the ceremony and decoration of organized Catholicism 
(which the Lutherans so despised) should be lavishly financed and executed.

The Jesuits were able to obtain significant influence in the Early Modern Period
because Jesuit priests often acted as confessors to the Kings of the time. They 
were the leading force in the Counter-Reformation, in part because of their 
relatively loose structure (without the requirements of living in community, 
saying the holy office, etc.) allowed them to be flexible to the needs of the 
people at the time.

Expansion

Early missions in Japan resulted in the government granting the Jesuits the 
feudal fiefdom of Nagasaki in 1580, which was removed in 1587 however, due to 
fears over their growing influence.

Two Jesuit missionaries, Gruber and D'Orville, reached Lhasa in Tibet in 1661.

Jesuit missions in Latin America were very controversial in Europe, especially 
in Spain and Portugal, where they were seen as interfering with the proper 
colonial enterprises of the royal governments. The Jesuits were often the only 
thing that saved the Indians from slavery. Together throughout South America but
especially in Paraguay they formed Christian-Indian city-states, called 
"reductions" (Spanish "Reducciones"). These were societies set up in the ideal
Catholic way. It is partly for this reason of protection of the Indians whom 
certain Spanish and Portuguese wanted to enslave, that they were suppressed.

Jesuit mission in China brought about the Chinese Rites controversy in the early
18th century.

Period of troubles

The suppression of the Jesuits in Portugal, France, the Two Sicilies, Parma and
the Spanish Empire by 1767 were troubling to the Society's defender, Pope Clement
XIII. Following adecree signed by Pope Clement XIV in July 1773, the Jesuits were
suppressed in all countries (other than Russia, where the Russian Orthodox 
government refused to recognize papal authority) in the 18th century, then revived
in the 19th century.

Jesuits today

The Society of Jesus is very active in missionary work and in education, 
operating over 50 high schools and colleges in the United States alone.

Some Latin American Jesuits have taken leftist views of Catholicism, developing 
Theology of Liberation against the Vatican orientations. Whether taking such 
political positions is acceptable for Jesuits has been the theme of many debates
within the Catholic Church.

Their motto is "Ad Majorem Dei Gloriam," a Latin phrase, often abbreviated AMDG, 
which means "for the greater glory of God." This phrase is designed to reflect 
the idea that any work that is not evil can be meritorious for heaven if it is 
performed with this intention, even things considered normally indifferent like 
filling up a gas tank in a car.

Controversies

The Jesuits have frequently been described by Catholic and Protestant enemies as
engaged in various conspiracies. In several languages," Jesuit" acquired a nuance 
of "hypocritical" to this effect.

Famous Jesuits

Among many distinguished early Jesuits was St. Francis Xavier, missionary to 
Asia who converted more people to Catholicism than anyone since St. Paul.

Other famous Jesuits include:

Giulio Alenio 
Juan Andres 
Jean Joseph Marie Amiot 
Pedro Arrupe 
Jakob Balde 
Abbé Augustin Barruél 
St. Robert Bellarmine 
Andrew Bobola 
Ru?er Josip Bo?kovi? 
The Canadian Martyrs 
John Carroll 
Giuseppe Castiglione 
 
Frederick C. Copleston 
Francois d'Aguillon 
Anthony de Mello 
Alexandre de Rhodes 
Jeremiah Delgado 
Alfred Delp 
Avery Dulles 
Jacques Dupuis 
 
Ignacio Ellacuria 
Peter Faber 
Father Leonard Feeney 
Luis Frois 
Eusebio Francisco Kino 
Athanasius Kircher 
Louis Maimbourg 
Gerard Manley Hopkins 
Jacques Marquette 
Karl Rahner 
Matteo Ricci 
Johann Adam Schall von Bell
Pierre Teilhard de Chardin 
Oswald von Nell-Breuning 
P.J. Zoetmulder 

Jesuit institutions

Jesuits have founded and/or managed a number of institutions, notably 
universities. The most prominent of these universities are in the United States 
where they are organized as the Association of Jesuit Colleges and Universities.
Other colleges and universities include:

Ateneo de Manila University, Philippines 
Ateneo de Naga University, Philippines 
Boston College, Boston, Massachusetts, USA Canisius College, Buffalo, New York, USA
College of the Holy Cross, Worcester, Massachusetts, USA 
Creighton University, Omaha, Nebraska, USA 
Fairfield University, Fairfield, Connecticut, USA 
Fordham University, The Bronx, New York, USA 
Georgetown University, Georgetown, Washington, DC, USA 
Gonzaga University, Spokane, Washington, USA 
Jesuit High School, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA- one of many Jesuit High Schools 
John Carroll University, University Heights, Ohio, USA 
Kolleg St. Blasien, St. Blasien, Germany- Catholic boarding school 
Le Moyne College, Syracuse, New York, USA 
Loyola College in Maryland, Baltimore, Maryland, USA 
Loyola Marymount University, Los Angeles, California, USA 
Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA 
Loyola University New Orleans, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA 
McQuaid Jesuit High School, Rochester, New York, USA 
Marquette University, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, USA 
Pontifical Gregorian University, Rome, Italy
Regis University, Denver, Colorado, USA 
Regis High School, New York, NY, USA 
Rockhurst University, Kansas City, Missouri, USA 
St. Bonaventure's College, St. John's, Newfoundland, Canada 
Saint Louis University, St. Louis, Missouri, USA 
Saint Joseph's University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA 
Saint Peter's College, Jersey City, New Jersey, USA 
Santa Clara University, Santa Clara, California, USA- grew out of a Jesuit 
   college in Mission Santa Clara de Asis
Seattle University, Seattle, Washington, USA 
Spring Hill College, Mobile, Alabama, USA 
Stonyhurst College, Blackburn, Lancashire UK 
Universidad de Deusto, Bilbao, Spain 
University of Ingolstadt, Ingolstadt, Germany - closed in 1800 
University of Detroit Mercy, Detroit, Michigan, USA 
University of San Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA
University of Scranton, Scranton, Pennsylvania, USA 
the predecessor grammar school of the University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia
Wheeling Jesuit University, Wheeling, West Virginia, USA 
Xavier University, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA 
Xavier University (Cagayan de Oro), Philippines

Jesuit buildings include

Ruins of Saint Paul's Cathedral in Macau 
</TEXT>
