<TITLE>Knights Templar
</TITLE>
<TOPIC>Knights Templar</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>Templar Knights</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>Templars</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>knights</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>history</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>militant religious order</TOPIC>
<TEXT>

The first of the military orders, the Knights Templar or Poor Knights of Christ 
were founded in 1118 in the aftermath of the First Crusade to help the new 
Kingdom of Jerusalem maintain itself against its defeated Muslim neighbors, and 
to ensure the safety of the large numbers of European pilgrims that flowed 
towards Jerusalem after its conquest.

History

Their name alludes to their historical headquarters in the Mosque of Omar 
(a.k.a. "Dome of the Rock") on the Temple Mount in Jerusalem. This they 
renamed "Templum Domini". Represented on one of their seals, the structure was 
believed to be a remnant of the Temple of Jerusalem, and was the model for many 
Templar churches in Europe, for example the Temple Church in London.

The Templars were organized as a monastic order, following a rule created for 
them by Bernard of Clairvaux, the founder of the Cistercian Order. The Templars 
were well-connected and quickly became prime movers in the international 
politics of the Crusades period. In time, they were endowed with several 
extraordinary Papal bulls (see Omne Datum Optimum) that permitted them, among 
other things, to levy taxes and accept tithing in the areas under their direct 
control, facilitating their quick rise to institutional power.

There were four divisions of brothers in the Templars:

- the knights, equipped as heavy cavalry 
- the sergeants, equipped as light cavalry and drawn from a lower social class than
  the knights 
- farmers, who administered the property of the Order 
- the chaplains, who were ordained priests and saw to the spiritual needs of the
  Order.

At any time, there were approximately 10 people in support positions for each 
Knight. In addition, there were brothers devoted only to banking, as this 
extraordinary Order was often trusted with precious goods by participants in the
Crusade - over time this grew into a new basis of money as Templars became 
increasingly involved in banking activities. It is some indication of their 
powerful political connections that the Templars' involvement in usury did not 
lead to more controversy within the Order and the church at large.

The Templars' political connections and awareness of the essentially urban and 
commercial nature of the "Outremer" communities naturally led the Order to a 
position of significant power both in Europe and the Holy Lands. Their success 
attracted the jealousy and greed of many other Orders and eventually that of the
nobility and monarchs of Europe as well, who were at this time seeking to 
monopolize control of money and banking after a long chaotic period in which 
civil society, especially the Church and its lay Orders, had dominated financial
activities. The Templars' holdings were extensive both in Europe and the Middle 
East, including, for a time, the entire island of Cyprus.

Besides Palestine, the order also fought in the Spanish "Reconquista". They were 
given extensive possessions and castles in frontier land. At one point, they 
were to inherit the kingdom of Aragon, jointly with other military orders.

On October 13, 1307, what may have been all the Knights Templar in France were 
simultaneously arrested by agents of Philip the Fair ("Philippe le Bel"), to be
later tortured into admitting heresy in the Order. A modern historical view is 
that Philip, who seized the treasury and broke up the monastic banking system, 
simply sought to control it for himself. This, and the Templars' original 
banking of assets for suddenly-mobile depositors, were two of many shifts 
towards a system of military fiat to back European money, removing this power 
from Church Orders. The Hospitallers of St John of Jerusalem, seeing the fate of
the Templars, were also convinced to give up banking at this time.

Many kings and nobles supported the Knights at that time, and only dissolved the
order in their fiefs when ordered so by Pope Clement V. In particular, Robert the
Bruce, King of the Scots, had already been excommunicated for other reasons and 
was not, therefore disposed to pay any attention to Papal commands. As a result 
many of the order fled to Scotland and also to Portugal, where the order name 
was changed to "Order of Christ" and is believed to have contributed to the first
naval discoveries of the Portuguese.

However, there had been a debate about whether the accusation of religious 
heresy was not, by the standards of the time, entirely without merit. Under 
torture, some Templars "admitted" to homosexual acts, the worship of "heads" and 
reverence for a mystery known as "Baphomet." Their leaders later denied the 
admission and for that were executed. Some authors discount this as a common 
accusation (as it was in the Inquisition), and therefore a typical forced 
admission but these accusations were in reality due to a misunderstanding of 
arcane rituals held behind closed doors which had their origins in the 
Crusaders' bitter struggle against the Saracens. These included "denying Christ 
and spitting on the Cross three times", as well as "kissing other men's behinds".
These acts were intended to simulate the kind of humiliation and torture that a 
Crusader might be subjected to by the Saracens if captured. They were taught how
to commit apostacy "with the mind only and not with the heart." As for the false 
accusations of head-worship and trying to syncretize Christianity with 
Mohammedanism, the former referred to rituals involving the alleged relics of 
Saint Euphemia, one of Saint Ursula's 11 maidens, Hughes de Payens and John the 
Baptist rather than pagan idols while the latter to the chaplains creating the 
term "Baphomet" through the Atbash cipher to mystify the term "Sophia" (Greek 
for "wisdom"), which was equated to the concept of "Logos" (Greek for"Word").

Conspiracy theories related to the suppression of the Knights Templar often go 
far beyond the simple and obvious motive of simply seizing property and 
consolidating political power, which was and remains an extremely common 
motivation for all forms of religious persecution. Ironically, it is the 
Catholic Church's position that the persecution was unjust, that there was 
nothing wrong with the Templars, and that the Pope at the time was manipulated 
into suppressing them. In 2001, Dr. Barbara Frale found the Chinon Parchment in 
the Secret Vatican Archives,<LINK>history:pages/history/Secret_Vatican_Archives</LINK>
a document that shows that Pope Clement V secretly pardoned the Knights Templar
in 1314.

Modern orders and claims of descent

Some Freemasons believe they were descended from Templars who fled to Scotland 
and that the group really did have heretical beliefs. There is a Masonic Knights
Templar organization which in America and other countries is part of the York 
Rite. In most jurisdictions it is open only to those who profess a belief in the
Christian religion. It is unknown whether or not it has historical connections 
with the original Knights Templar.

However, an ecumenical Christian chivalric society named the Sovereign Military 
Order of the Temple of Jerusalem was founded in 1804, with the support of 
Napoleon,<LINK>history:pages/history/Napoleon_Bonaparte</LINK> that is dedicated
to charitable works and antiquarian research. This order operates on the basis of
the traditions of the medieval Knights Templar. It is probably the modern 
organization that most effectively reclaims the spirit of, but does not assert
any direct descent from the ancient order. In 2001, the United Nations granted 
the Order of the Temple a special consultative status.

Myths

The rapid succession of the last direct Capetian kings of France between 1314 
and 1328, the three sons of Philip IV the Fair, led many to believe that the 
dynasty had been cursed---thus the name of "cursed Kings" ("rois maudits"). It is
said that Jacques de Molay, the last master of the order, cursed King Philip 
while laying on his execution pyre.

Lately, fringe researchers and aficionados of esotericism have claimed that the 
order stored secret knowledge, linking them to the Rosicrucians, the 
Hashshashin, the Priory of Sion, the Rex Deus, the Cathars, the Hermetics, the 
Gnostics, the Essenes, and ultimately lost teachings or relics of Jesus, Solomon
and Moses. The Order of the Solar Temple is an example of a neo-Templar group 
that claimed to be a recipient of this esoterica.

However the order was always surrounded by legends concerning secrets and 
mysteries handed down to the select from ancient times. Perhaps most well known 
are the those concerning the Holy Grail, the Ark of the Covenant and secrets of 
building.

Some sources say the Holy Grail was found by the order and taken to Scotland 
during the scourging of the order in 1307 and that it remains buried beneath 
Rosslyn Chapel.

Perhaps the most numerous legends are those concerning the Ark of the Covenant, 
the chest which contained various sacred objects of ancient Israel including 
Aaron's rod and, most notably, the tablets of stone inscribed by Moses with the 
Ten Commandments.

These myths are connected with the long occupation by the order of the temple 
mount in Jerusalem. Some sources record that they discovered secrets of the 
master masons who had built the original and second temples secreted there along
with knowledge that the Ark had been moved to Ethiopia before the destruction of 
the first temple. Some allusion to this is made in engravings on the Cathedral 
at Chartres,<LINK>art:pages/art/Cathedral_of_Chartres</LINK> often considered to be the 
first example of what came to known as the gothic style of architecture, great 
influence over the building of which was had by St. Bernard of Clairvaux, who was
also influential in the formation of the order. Further links to both the search
by the order for the Ark and to its discovery of ancient secrets of building are
suggested by existence of the monolithic Church of St George in Lalibela in 
Ethiopia, which stands to this day and whose construction is attributed to the
Knights Templar. There is also an underground church dated to the same period in
Aubeterre in France.

Lastly, there is a growing speculation surrounding the possibility that the 
Knights Templar may have sponsored pre-Columbian voyages to America.

Grand Masters from 1118 to 1314

1. Hughes de Payens (1118-1136) 
2. Robert de Craon  (1136-1146) 
3. Everard des Barres(1146-1149) 
4. Bernard de Tromelai(1149-1153) 
5. Andre de Montbard(1153-1156) 
6. Bertrand de Blanchefort (1156-1169) 
7. Philip de Milly  (1169-1171) 
8. Odo de St Amand  (1171-1179) 
9. Arnold de Toroga(1179-1184) 
10. Gerard de Ridefort (1185-1189) 
11. Robert de Sable  (1191-1193) 
12. Gilbert Erail (1193-1200) 
13. Philip de Plessiez(1201-1208) 
14. William de Chartres(1209-1219) 
15. Pedro de Montaigu(1219-1230) 
16. Armond de Perigord(???-1244) 
17. Richard de Bures(1245-1247) 
18. William de Sonnac(1247-1250) 
19. Reynald de Vichiers(1250-1256) 
20. Thomas Berard (1256-1273) 
21. William de Beaujeu(1273-1291) 
22. Tibauld de Gaudin(1291-1293) 
23. Jacques de Molay (1293-1314)

Places associated with the Knights Templar

Temple Church in London 
Castle of Almourol in Portugal
</TEXT>
