<TITLE>LEGO</TITLE>
<TOPIC>LEGO</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>toy</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>pop culture</TOPIC>
<TEXT>
LEGO is a Danish toy company best known for its line of interconnecting plastic 
bricks. The company adopted the name LEGO in 1934, a portmanteau formed from the
Danish phrase "leg godt", meaning "play well". Until 1949, the LEGO company 
primarily produced wooden toys.

History of LEGO

LEGO was not always the refined system of high-quality plastic building bricks 
that it is today. It had humble beginnings in the workshop of Ole Kirk 
Christiansen, a poor carpenter from Billund, Denmark. His innovative 
family-owned business would one day grow into one of the most well-respected toy
companies in the world.

Beginnings

In 1916, Christiansen opened a woodworking shop in Billund, and earned his 
living by constructing houses and furniture for farmers in the region, with the 
help of a small staff of apprentices. His workshop burned down in 1924 when a 
fire, lit by his two young sons, ignited some wood shavings. Undaunted, Ole Kirk
took the disaster as an opportunity to construct a larger workshop, and worked 
towards expanding his business even further; however, the Great Depression 
would soon have an impact on his livelihood. In finding ways to minimize 
production costs, Ole Kirk began producing miniature versions of his products as
design aids. It was these miniature stepladders and ironing boards that inspired 
him to begin producing toys.

Ole Kirk's shop started making wooden pull toys, piggy banks, cars and trucks. 
He enjoyed a modest amount of success, but families were poor and often unable 
to afford such toys. Farmers in the area sometimes traded food in exchange for 
his toys; Ole Kirk found he had to continue producing practical furniture in 
addition to toys in order to stay in business. In the mid-1930s, the yo-yo toy 
fad gave him a brief period of activity, until its sudden collapse. Once again, 
Ole Kirk turned disadvantage to his favor, turning the disused yo-yo parts into 
wheels for a toy truck. His son Godtfred began working for him, and taking an 
active role in the company.

It was in 1934 that the company name "LEGO" was coined by Christiansen from the 
Danish phrase "leg godt", meaning "play well." Some claim that "LEGO" means "I 
put together" or "I assemble" in Latin, although this is a rather liberal 
translation of a verb form that would normally translate as "I read" or "I gather".

When plastic came into widespread use, Ole Kirk kept with the times and began 
producing plastic toys. One of the first modular toys to be produced was a truck
which could be taken apart and re-assembled. It wasn't until 1949 that the 
interlocking plastic bricks, which made the company famous, were developed. 
These"Automatic Binding Bricks", manufactured from cellulose acetate, were 
developed in the spirit of traditional wooden blocks that could be stacked upon 
one another; the revolutionary concept, however, was that these plastic bricks 
could be"locked" together. They had several round"studs" on top, and a hollow 
rectangular bottom. They would stick together, but not so tightly that they 
couldn't be pulled apart. In 1953, the bricks were given a new name:"LEGO 
Mursten", or"LEGO Bricks."

The use of plastic for toy manufacture was not highly regarded by retailers and 
consumers of the time. Many of LEGO's shipments were returned, following poor 
sales; it was thought that plastic toys could never replace wooden ones. Despite
such criticism, however, the Kirk Christiansens persevered. By 1954, Godtfred had
becomet he junior managing director of LEGO. It was his conversation with an 
overseas buyer that struck the idea of a toy "system". Godtfred saw the immense 
potential in LEGO bricks to become a system for creative play, but the bricks 
still had some problems from a technical standpoint: their "locking" ability was 
limited, and they were not very versatile. It wasn't until 1958 that the 
modern-day brick design was developed. The bricks were improved with hollow 
tubes in the underside of the brick. This added support in the base, enabling 
much better locking ability and improved versatility. That same year, Ole Kirk 
Christiansen died, and Godtfred inherited leadership of the company.

Growth

LEGO matured substantially over the coming years. In 1959, the Futura division 
was founded within the company. Its small staff was responsible for generating 
ideas for new sets. Another warehouse fire struck the LEGO company in 1960, 
consuming most of the company's inventory of wooden toys; fortunately, the LEGO 
brick line was strong enough by then that the company decided to abandon 
production of wooden toys. By the end of the year, the staff of the LEGO company
had grown to 450.

1961 and 1962 saw the introduction of the first LEGO wheels, an addition which 
expanded the potential for building cars, trucks, busses and other vehicles from
LEGO bricks. Also during this time, LEGO introduced toys specifically targeted 
towards the pre-school market, and made an arrangement allowing Samsonite to 
begin producing and selling LEGO products in Canada, an arrangement which would 
continue until 1988. There were more than 50 sets of bricks in the LEGO System 
of Play by this time.

In 1963, cellulose acetate, the plastic material used to create LEGO bricks, was
dropped in favor of a more stable material. Cellulose acetate was known to have 
problems with discoloration and warping; its successor was acrylonitrile 
butadiene styrene, or ABS plastic, which is still used as of 2004. ABS had a 
number of additional advantages over cellulose acetate: it is more resistant to 
heat, acids, salt, and other chemicals, and is non-toxic. LEGO bricks 
manufactured from ABS plastic in 1963 still hold most of their shape and color 
40 years later, and still neatly interlock with LEGO bricks manufactured in 
2003. 1964 was the first time that instruction manuals were included in LEGO 
sets.

One of LEGO's most successful series, the LEGO train system, was first released 
in 1966. The original train sets included a 4.5-volt motor and rails; two years 
later, a 12-volt motor was introduced. On June 7, 1968, the LEGOLAND Park in 
Billund was opened. This theme park featured elaborate models of miniature 
towns, built entirely from LEGO bricks. The three-acre park attracted 625,000 
visitors in its first year alone. During the next 20 years, the park grew to 
more than eight times its original size, and eventually averaged close to a 
million paying visitors per year. More than eighteen million LEGO sets were sold
in 1968.

In 1969, the DUPLO system went on sale. This was a newly developed system, 
targeted towards younger children; DUPLO bricks are much larger than LEGO 
bricks, making them safer for very young children, but the two systems are 
compatible: LEGO bricks can be fitted neatly onto DUPLO bricks, making the 
transition to the LEGO system easily made as children outgrow their DUPLO 
bricks.

The 1960s were such a period of growth for the LEGO company that by 1970, one of
the biggest questions they faced was how best to manage and control its expanding
market. 

Expansion

By 1970, the LEGO company had a staff of more than 900. The coming decades would
mark considerable expansion into new frontiers of toy making and marketing. LEGO 
began to target the female market with the introduction of furniture pieces and 
doll houses in 1971. The LEGO universe expanded its transportation possibilities
with the addition of boat and ship sets, with hull pieces that actually floated, 
in 1972.

During this same period, Godfred Kirk Christiansen's son, Kjeld Kirk 
Kristiansen, joined the managerial staff of the company, after earning business 
degrees in Switzerland and Denmark. (Kjeld's surname is spelled with a "K", 
instead of a "Ch", due to a mistake on his birth certificate; he kept the 
spelling.) One of Kjeld's first achievements with the company was the foundation
of manufacturing facilities, as well as a research and development department 
that would be responsible for keeping the company's manufacturing methods up to 
date. Human figures with posable arms made an appearance in 1974 in "LEGO family"
sets, which went on to become the biggest sellers at the time; in the same year, 
an early version of the "minifig" minuature LEGO person was introduced, but it 
was not posable and had no face printed on its head. A LEGO production plant was
opened in Enfield, Connecticut in the United States. "Expert Series" sets were 
first introduced in 1975, geared towards older, more experienced LEGO builders. 
This line soon developed into the "Expert Builder" sets, released in 1977. These 
technical sets featured moving parts such as gears, differentials cogs, levers, 
axles and universal joints, and permitted the construction of realistic models 
such as automobiles, with functional rack and pinion steering and lifelike 
engine movements. Finally, the LEGO world came together in 1978 with the 
addition of the LEGO "minifig" that is still known today. These small LEGO people
have posable arms and legs, and a friendly smile. The figure was used in many 
varieties of LEGO sets, allowing consumers to construct elaborate towns with 
buildings, roads, vehicles, trains, and boats, at the same scale, and populated 
with the smiling minifig LEGO citizens.

Another significant expansion to the LEGO line occurred in 1979, with the 
creation of LEGO Space sets. Astronaut minifigs, rockets, lunar rovers and 
spaceships populated this successful series. FABULAND, a fantasy series targeted
towards younger children, debuted in this year as well, as did the SCALA series, 
featuring jewelry elements marketed towards young girls. Kjeld Kirk Kristiansen 
became the president of LEGO in this year; another decade concluded with LEGO 
still going strong.

LEGO bricks had always had a constructive potential that was seen by some 
educators as being an invaluable asset in helping children to develop creativity
and problem-solving abilities. Since the 1960s, teachers had been using LEGO 
bricks in the classroom for a variety of reasons. In 1980, LEGO established the 
Educational Products Department (eventually renamed LEGO DACTA, in 1989), 
specifically to expand the educational possibilities of their toys. A packing 
and assembly factory opened in Switzerland, followed by another in Jutland, 
Denmark, which manufactured LEGO tires.

The second generation LEGO Trains appeared in 1981. As before these were 
available in either 4.5V (battery powered) or 12V (mains powered), but a much 
wider variety of accessories were available, including working lights, 
remote-controlled points and signals, and even decouplers.

The "Expert Builder" series matured in 1982, becoming the "Technic" series. August
13 of that year marked the LEGO company's 50th anniversary; the book "50 Years of 
Play" was published to commemmorate the occasion. In the following year, the 
DUPLO system was expanded to include sets for even younger audiences, 
particularly infants; new sets included baby rattles and figures with adjustable
limbs. In another year, LEGO minifig citizens gained a realm of knights and 
horses, with the introduction of the first Castle sets. Light & Sound sets made 
their appearance in 1986; these sets included a battery pack with electrical 
lights, buzzers, and other accessories to add another dimension of realism to 
LEGO creations. Also that year, LEGO's educational division produced the Technic
Computer Control, which was an educational system whereby Technic robots, trucks,
and other motorized models could be controlled with a computer. Manaus, Brazil 
gained a LEGO factory in this year, as well.

In 1986, the Technic line was expanded with the addition of pneumatic 
components.

In August of 1988, 38 children from 17 different countries took part in the 
first LEGO World Cup building contest, held in Billund. That same year, LEGO 
Canada was established. The LEGO line grew again in 1989 with the release of the
LEGO Pirates series, which featured a variety of pirate ships, desert islands and
treasure; the series was also the first to depart from the standard minifig 
smiley face to create an array of piratical characters. LEGO's Educational 
Products Department was renamed LEGO DACTA in this year; the name is derived 
from the Greek word "didactic", which roughly means "the study of the learning 
process." MIT's Dr. Seymour Papert, from the Laboratory of Computer Learning, 
was named "LEGO Professor of Learning Research," after his ongoing work in 
linking the Logo programming language with LEGO products.

A new series designed for advanced builders was released in 1990. Three Model 
Team sets, including a race car and an off-road vehicle, featured a level of 
detail and realism not previously seen in any LEGO series. Where Technic was 
mechanically accurate, Model Team was visually and stylistically accurate. The 
LEGO company became one of the top 10 toy companies in this year; the only toy 
company in Europe to be among the top 10. LEGOLAND Billund had more than one 
million visitors in this year, for the first time in its history. The 
first-ever "LEGO Professor of Business Dynamics," Xavier Gilbert, was appointed 
to an endowed chair at the International Institute for Management Development in
Lausanne, Switzerland. LEGO Malaysia was also established in 1990. In 1991, LEGO 
standardised their electrical components and systems- the Trains series was made
9V, along with the Technic motors, to bring the systems into line with the rest 
of the LEGO range.

Two "Guinness" records were set in 1992 using LEGO products: A castle made from 
400,000 LEGO bricks, and measuring 4.45 meters by 5.22 meters, was built on 
Swedish television, and a LEGO train 545 meters in length, with three 
locomotives, was constructed. DUPLO was augmented with the addition of the Toolo
line featuring a screwdriver, wrench, nuts and bolts; the Paradisa line, targeted
towards girls, brought a variety of new pastel colors into the LEGO system. 1993 
brought a DUPLO train and a parrot-shaped "brickvac" that could pick LEGO pieces 
up off the floor.

The most common colors of basic LEGO bricks are red, yellow, blue, black, white,
and light grey. Other colors joined the palette in the late 1990's. LEGO avoided 
making green bricks for a long time, fearing they would be used to build 
military vehicles and use LEGO bricks as a war toy, but that fear seems to have 
abated. The vast majority of minifig heads are yellow, with only a few 
(basketball players and Star Wars Lando Calrissian) being brown; this has 
brought accusations that LEGO is racist, but a common response from fans is 
that "people" aren't yellow.

Manufacturing LEGO

LEGO brick design can be deceptively simple. The vast array of pieces in the 
LEGO System of Play seem to require no explanation; since they are made for 
children, they are designed to be so straightforward as to require little or no 
instruction in how to use them. To achieve such apparent simplicity, a 
considerable amount of engineering and precision manufacturing must go into the 
creation of each LEGO piece.

One of the key features of LEGO bricks throughout their history is that they 
are, first and foremost, part of a "system". Each new series and set that is 
released is compatible with the rest of the system; LEGO pieces, regardless of 
their size, shape, or function, fit together with all other LEGO pieces in some 
way. The gear and motor mechanisms that come with the most advanced Technic 
sets, designed for teenagers, can be almost effortlessly attached to the DUPLO 
bricks designed for three-year-old children. This characteristic enables the 
LEGO system to grow and adapt as children get older; the infinite possibilities 
presented by the system keep many adults fascinated, as well.

Manufacturing of LEGO bricks occurs at a number of locations around the world. 
As of 2003, molding is done at one of two plants in Denmark and Switzerland. 
Brick decorations and packaging may be done at plants in Denmark, Switzerland, 
U.S., South Korea and the Czech Republic. Annual production of LEGO bricks 
averages approximately 20 billion (2 × 10^10) per year, or about 2.3 million per
hour. Bricks, beams, axles, minifigs, and all other pieces in the LEGO system, 
are manufactured to an exacting degree of tolerance. When snapped together, 
pieces must have just the right amount of "clutch power"; they must stay together
until pulled apart. They cannot be too easy to pull apart, or the result will be 
LEGO creations that are unstable; they cannot be too difficult to pull apart, 
since the disassembly of one creation in order to build another is part of the 
LEGO appeal. In order for pieces to have just the right amount of "clutch power",
LEGO pieces are manufactured within a tolerance of two thousandths of a 
millimetre (0.002 mm), or eighty millionths of an inch (0.00008 in).

One of the techniques that helps to maintain this high degree of quality is the 
small capacity of the molds; some toy companies, in order to cut manufacturing 
costs, use molds capable of stamping out sixty pieces at a time. LEGO molds 
generally have a much smaller capacity, and are precision-machined, often 
costing tens of thousands of dollars. The injection molds are equipped with 
sensors to detect fluctuations in pressure and temperature, either of which can 
degrade the quality of the resulting piece. Human inspectors meticulously check 
the output of the molds, to ensure that there are no significant variations in 
color or thickness. Worn-out molds are encased in the foundations of buildings 
to prevent their falling into competitors' hands. According to the LEGO company,
its molding processes are so accurate that only 18 bricks out of every million 
fail to meet its stringent standards. It is thanks to this care in manufacturing
that LEGO has maintained such a high degree of quality over the decades; it is 
also part of the reason that pieces manufactured 30 years ago still interlock 
neatly with pieces manufactured today.

LEGO today

Since it began producing plastic bricks, LEGO has released many thousands of 
play sets themed on space, robots, pirates, medieval castles, dinosaurs, cities,
suburbia, holiday locations, the Wild West, the Arctic, boats, racing cars, 
trains, "Star Wars", "Harry Potter" and more. New pieces are being released 
constantly, allowing LEGO to become more and more versatile.

There are also motors, gears, lights, noise makers and cameras available to be 
used with the other LEGO components. There are even bricks that can be 
programmed with a personal computer to perform very complicated procedures. 
These programmable bricks are sold under the name LEGO Mindstorms.

In the late 1990s, LEGO brought out a series of new and specialised ranges aimed
at particular demographics. The Bionicle range uses Technic pieces and specialist
mouldings to create a set of action figures for boys, while Belville is a more 
conventional lego range aimed at girls and featuring large posable figures like 
those in the "Technic" range. A LEGO 4 Juniors group features medium-sized 
figures with jointed arms, and longer legs than the classic minifig LEGO man. In
2003, LEGO introduced a completely new system, Clikits, aimed at girls and 
consisting of customizable plastic jewellery and accessories.

LEGO has now been used for purposes beyond play. It has developed a cult 
following of people who have used LEGO to make sculptures, very large mosaics 
and complex machines. Some sculptures use hundreds of thousands of pieces and 
weigh tens of kilograms. Mosaics can be the size of large wall hangings. People 
have used LEGO to create machines such as fully functional padlocks and pendulum
clocks.One such LEGO masterpiece actually solves a Rubik's Cube, a task that 
many humans cannot accomplish.

LEGO has been used in a number of unexpected ways. For example, the people at 
the website (/http://www.theory.org.uk/lego.htm/) combine LEGO with social 
theory. A set of software tools called LDraw can be used to model possible LEGO 
creations in 3D. Because of the high degree of uniformity in LEGO bricks, they 
have also been used in fields such as computer vision, in which knowing the exact
dimensions and relative positions of objects is useful for creating test data.

LEGO as artists' material

One hobby among enthusiasts is to re-create popular scenes from famous movies, 
using LEGO bricks for the scenery and LEGO play sets as characters. Such movies 
are called "Brickfilms", "LEGO movies" or "cinema LEGO". For example, th "/Monty 
Python and the Holy Grail" DVD contained a version of the "Camelot" musical 
sequence redone with LEGO minifigs and accessories. LEGO itself sells a line of 
sets named "LEGO Studios," which contain a LEGO webcam (repackaged Logitech USB 
Quickcam), software to record video on a computer, clear plastic rods which can 
be used to manipulate minifigs while hiding your hands offscreen, and a minifig 
which looks like Steven Spielberg.

LEGO has also been used by artists, with one of the more notorious examples 
being Polish artist Zbigniew Libera's "LEGO Concentration Camp," a collection of 
mocked-up concentration camp-themed LEGO sets.

The LEGO trademark

LEGO's name has become so synonymous with their flagship toy that many use the 
words "LEGO" or "LEGOs" to refer to the bricks themselves, and even to any plastic
bricks resembling LEGO bricks, although the LEGO company discourages such 
dilution of their trademark name (see trademark). LEGO catalogues in the 1970's 
and 1980's contained a note which read:

The word LEGO® is a brand name and is very special to all of us in the LEGO 
Group Companies. We would sincerely like your help in keeping it special. Please
always refer to our bricks as 'LEGO Bricks or Toys' and not 'LEGOS.' By doing so, 
you will be helping to protect and preserve a brand of which we are very proud 
and that stands for quality the world over. Thank you! Susan Williams, Consumer 
Services.

LEGO is officially written in all uppercase letters.

COKO bricks and figures, similar in design to LEGO bricks.

Consumers on a budget are sometimes willing to forego the LEGO brand in favor of
a cheaper alternative. A number of companies have produced interlocking bricks 
that are nearly identical to LEGO bricks. Toy company Tyco produced such bricks 
for a time; other competitors include Mega Bloks and COKO. These imitations are 
typically compatible with LEGO bricks, and are marketed at a lower cost than 
LEGO sets. Such brands are somewhat troublesome to the LEGO Company, due to 
concerns about possible confusion between genuine LEGO products and LEGO product
imitators. In 2003 the LEGO Company won a lawsuit in Norway against the marketing
group Biltema for its sale of Coko products, on the grounds that the company used
such product confusion for marketing purposes.

Similar action has been taken against Coko distributors in other countries; in 
2002 a Chinese manufacturer of COKO products was ordered by the Beijing High 
People's Court to hand over its plastic molds for destruction, and to issue a 
formal apology to the LEGO Company.[1]
(/http://www.lego.com/eng/info/default.asp?page=pressdetail&contentid=2484&countrycode=2057&yearcode=2003&archive=true&bhcp=1/)

LEGOLAND

LEGO has built several theme parks around the world, each known as LEGOLAND, 
featuring large scale models, particularly of famous landmarks. The first of 
these is located in Billund, Denmark. Others followed: LEGOLAND Windsor, 
England, LEGOLAND California in Carlsbad, California and LEGOLAND Deutschland in
Günzburg, Germany.

When the Mall of America opened in 1992, one of its premier attractions, 
attached to the Camp Snoopy amusement park, was the LEGO Imagination Center. 
Another LEGO Imagination Center is located in the Downtown Disney area of Walt 
Disney World. These two locations are large LEGO stores with lots of displays of
LEGO statues as well as a play area with bins of bricks to build with; they offer
a large selection of LEGO sets for sale, including sets which are advertised in 
LEGO catalogues as "Not Available In Any Store."

The 2003 opening of a dedicated LEGO shop in Birmingham's Bull Ring shopping 
centre (England) was marked by the production of a limited-editon specially 
branded LEGO piece.
</TEXT>
