<TITLE>Marshall McLuhan</TITLE>
<TOPIC>Marshall McLuhan</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>pop culture</TOPIC>
<TEXT>
Herbert Marshall McLuhan (July 21, 1911 - December 31, 1980) was a Canadian 
futurist, academic, philosopher, and one of the founders of modern media studies.

He was born to Elsie and Herbert McLuhan in Edmonton, Alberta, Canada, and raised
in a Baptist Scottish-Irish family. He later converted to Roman Catholicism. 
McLuhan would remain a strong Catholic throughout his career. Some argue that his
religion played a heavy role in his philosophical studies.

McLuhan became a pop culture figure in the 1960s with the publication 
of "Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man" (McGraw-Hill, 1964) and "The 
Medium is the Message: An Inventory of Effects" (with designer Quentin Fiore, 
Random House, 1967).

Famous for coining the phrases "The medium is the message" (he later published 
a book whose title was a play on this phrase-"The Medium is the Massage") 
and "the global village", McLuhan became one of the early purveyors of the sound 
bite. He asserted that each different medium is an extension of the senses that 
affects the individual and society in distinct and pervasive ways, further 
classifying some media as "hot"-- media which engage one's senses in a 
high-intensity, exclusive way, such as typography, radio, and film-- and other 
media as "cool"-- media of lower resolution or intensity, that require more 
interaction from the viewer, such as the telephone and the television. While 
many of his pronouncements and theories have been considered impenetrable, and 
by some absurd, McLuhan's central message-- that to understand today's world, 
one must actively study the effects of media-- remains ever more true in the 
electronic age. Wired Magazine named McLuhan its "patron saint" when the magazine
launched in 1993.

In his seminal work, "Understanding Media: the Extensions of Man" (1964), 
Marshall McLuhan allegedly coined the term "software" (though the Merriam-Webster
dictionary traces usage of the word back to 1960).

The phrase "global village" was coined by McLuhan in 1959, and appears in 1962's
"The Gutenberg Galaxy", McLuhan's study of the psychological and cognitiveeffects
of standardised printing.

Marshall McLuhan died December 31, 1980 of a cerebral stroke which rendered him
speechless during the last year of his life.

In 2000, he was honored by the government of Canada with his image on a postage 
stamp.

Bibliography

1951 "The Mechanical Bride: Folklore of Industrial Man" (Vanguard Press) 
1962 "The Gutenberg Galaxy: The Making of Typographic Man" (University of Toronto Press) 
1964 "Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man" (McGraw-Hill) 
1967 "Verbi-Voco-Visual Explorations" (Something Else Press) 
1967 "The Medium is the Massage: An Inventory of Effects", with Quentin Fiore 
     (Random House/1989 Simon and Schuster) 
1968 "War and Peace in the Global Village", with Quentin Fiore
     (McGraw-Hill/1989 Simon and Schuster) 
1968 "Through the Vanishing Point: Space in Poetry and in Painting", with Harley Parker 
     (Harper and Row: World Perspective Series Vol 37) 
1969 "Counterblast", with Harley Parker (McClelland and Stewart) 
1970 "From Cliche to Archetype", with Wilfred Watson (Viking) 
1970 "Culture is Our Business" (McGraw-Hill) 
1972 "Take Today: The Executive as Drop-out" (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich) 
1977 "City as Classroom: Understanding Language and Media", with Kathryn Hutchon and 
      Eric McLuhan (Book Society of Canada Limited)

Posthumous books

1988 "Laws of Media: The New Science", with Eric McLuhan
     (University of Toronto Press) 
1989 "The Global Village: Transformations in World Life and Media in the 21st Century", 
     with Bruce R. Powers (Oxford University Press)
</TEXT>
