<TITLE>Mass media in India</TITLE>
<TOPIC>Mass media in India</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>Mass media</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>pop culture</TOPIC>
<TEXT>
Media penetration as of 2003 
                               All India    Urban 
Print                          25%          46% 
Terrestrial television         53%          80% 
Cable and satellite television 20%          46% 
Radio                          22%          25% 
Cinema                          7%          11% 
Internet                        1%           3%

Media in India, especially news media, are undergoing significant changes in 
the current liberalised environment. To understand these changes, one needs to 
have some idea of the road traversed so far. It is useful to look at media in 
the two phases of India's history- pre-colonial and post-colonial. Each medium 
has taken its own evolutionary path.

The National and the English press; Bofors and Tehelka; "The Hindu" and "Indian
Express"; "Times of India" and "The Statesman";"India Today" and"Outlook"; 
Pothan Joseph and G Kasturi; N Ram and Vinod Mehta; The Hoot and 
IndianOnlineJournalism.Org are not contrasts but a sampling of the range that 
needs to be covered here.

Introduction

J. Natarajan's "History of Indian Journalism", Part II of the Report of the Press
Commission is an excellent source. It is used as a source here.

William Bolts, an ex-employee of the British East India Company attempted to 
start the first newspaper in India way back in 1776. Bolts had to beat a retreat
under the disapproving gaze of the Court of Directors of the Company. The "Bengal
Gazette" by James Augustus Hicky was started in 1780. The "Gazette", a two-sheet 
newspaper, "specialised" in writing on the private lives of the Sahibs of the 
Company. He dared even to mount "scurrillious attacks" on the Governor-General 
Warren Hastings' wife, which soon landed "the late printer to the Honourable 
Company" in trouble.

Hicky landed himself a 4 months jail term and Rs.500 fine, which did not deter 
him. After a bitter attack on the Governor-General and the Chief Justice, Hicky 
was sentenced to one year in prison and fined Rs.5,000, which finally drove him 
to penury. These are the first tentative steps of journalism in India.

B. Messink and Peter Reed were plaint publishers of the "India Gazette", unlike 
their infamous predecessor. The colonial establishment started the" Calcutta 
Gazette". It was followed by another private initiative the "Bengal Journal". 
The "Oriental Magazine of Calcutta Amusement", a monthly magazine made it four 
weekly newspapers and one monthly magazine published from Calcutta, now Kolkata.

Madras, now Chennai: The "Madras Courier" was started in 1785 in the southern 
stronghold of Madras, which is called Chennai now. Richard Johnson, its founder,
was a government printer. Madras got its second newspaper when, in 1791, Hugh 
Boyd, who was the editor of the" Courier" quit and founded the "Hurkaru". 
Tragically for the paper, Boyd passed away within a year of its founding- it 
ceased publication too.

It was only in 1795 that competitors to the "Courier" emerged with the founding 
of the "Madras Gazette" followed by the "India Herald". The latter was 
an "unauthorised" publication, which led to the deportation of its founder 
Humphreys. The "Madras Courier" was designated the purveyor of official 
information in the Presidency.

Bombay, now Mumbai: Bombay, surprisingly was a late starter- the "Bombay Herald" 
came into existence in 1789. Significantly, a year later a paper called 
the "Courier" started carrying advertisements in Gujarati.

The first media merger of sorts: The "Bombay Gazette", which was started in 1791,
merged with the"Bombay Herald" the following year. Like the "Madras Courier", 
this new entity was recognised as the publication to carry "official 
notifications and advertisements". 'A Chronicle of Media and the State', by 
Jeebesh Bagchi in the "Sarai Reader 2001" is a handy timeline on the role of the
state in the development of media in India for more than a century.

Bagchi divides the timeline into three 'ages'. The Age of Formulation, which 
starts with the Indian Telegraph Act in 1885 and ends with the Report of the 
Sub-Committee on Communication, National Planning Committee in 1948. The Age of 
Consolidation that follows stretches from 1951, with the extension of the Indian
Telegraph Act to the whole of India and ends with the promulgation of the 
Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition) Act in 1985. The current age is 
the Age of Uncertainty, which began in 1989 with the introduction of the Prasar 
Bharati(Broadcasting Corporation of India) Bill. The story gets better from now.

II News Agencies:

PTI (Press Trust of India) and UNI (United News of India) are the two primary 
Indian news agencies. The former was formed after the it took over the 
operations of the Associated Press of India and the Indian operations of Reuters
soon after independence on August 27, 1947. PTI is a non-profit cooperative of 
the Indian newspapers.

UNI began its operations on March 21, 1961, though it was registered as a 
company in 1959 itself.

List of popular publications in urban India in 2003
"Dainik Bhaskar" (Hindi daily)
"Dainik Jagran" (Hindi daily)
"The Times of India" (English daily)
"Amar Ujala" (Hindi daily)
"Anand Bazar Patrika" (Bengali daily)
"Grihshobha" (Hindi)
"Eenadu" (daily)
"Lokmat" (Hindi daily)
"India Today" (weekly; Hindi edition most popular)
"Gujarat Samachar" (Gujarati daily)

List of popular English dailies in urban India in 2003
"The Times of India"
"Hindustan Times"
"The Hindu"
"The Telegraph"
"Deccan Chronicle"
"The Economic Times"
"The New Indian Express"
"Mid-Day"
"Deccan Herald"
"Indian Express"
</TEXT>
