<TITLE>Amedeo Modigliani</TITLE>
<TOPIC>Amedeo Modigliani</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>Italian painter</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>painter</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>sculptor</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>art</TOPIC>
<TEXT>
Amedeo Clemente Modigliani (July 12, 1884- January 24, 1920) was an Italian 
painter and sculptor.

Amedeo Modigliani

He was born in Livorno, Tuscany, Italy, the fourth child of the Jewish family of
Flaminio Modigliani and his French-born wife, Euginie Garsin and was raised in 
poverty after his father's money-changing business went bankrupt. Amedeo was 
also beset by health problems after an attack of typhoid at the age of 14 
followed by tuberculosis two years later. His family suffered with a history of 
depression as did he, and at least some of his siblings seemed to have also 
inherited his stubborn, independent streak. In 1898 his 26-year-old brother, 
Emmanuel, was sentenced to six months imprisonment as an anarchist.

In 1902 Amedeo Modigliani enrolled in the Scuola libera di Nudo (Free School of 
Nude Studies) in Florence and a year later moved to Venice where he registered 
to study at the Istituto per le Belle Arti di Venezia. It is in Venice that he 
first tried hashish and, rather than studying, began to spend time frequenting 
the sleazy parts of the city.

In 1906 Modigliani moved to Paris the then focal point of the avant-garde, where
he would become the epitome of the tragic artist, creating a posthumous legend 
almost as famous as that of Vincent Van Gogh.

Settling in Le Bateau-Lavoir, a commune for penniless artists in Montmartre, he 
was soon busy painting, at first influenced by the work of Henri de 
Toulouse-Lautrec Paul Cezanne <LINK>art:pages/art/Paul_Cezanne</LINK> changed his views. 
Eventually though, Modigliani developed his own unique style, an oddity of a 
creative genius who was a contemporary of the Cubists but not a part of their 
movement. He is noted for his fast work, usually finishing a portrait in one or 
two sittings. And, once done, he never reworked any painting. Yet, those who 
posed for him said that being painted by Modigliani was like having your soul 
laid bare.

In 1909 Modigliani returned home to Livorno, sickly and worn out from his 
debauched lifestyle. He did not stay in Italy long and soon he was back in 
Paris, this time renting a studio in Montparnasse He had originally seen himself
as a sculptor more than a painter, and he began sculpting seriously after Paul 
Guillaume, an ambitious young art dealer, took an interest in his work and 
introduced him to Constantin Brancusi.

Seeing Modigliani's sculptures, there is evidence of him being influenced by art
from Africa and Cambodia which he probably saw in the Musee de l'Homme. His 
interest in African masks shows in the treatment of the sitters' faces. They 
appear ancient, almost Egyptian created flat and masklike, with distinctive 
almond eyes, pursed mouths, twisted noses, and elongated necks. Although a 
series of Modigliani's sculptures were exhibited in the autumn Salon of 1912 for
whatever reason he abruptly abandoned sculpting and focused solely on his 
painting.

Among his works is the portrait of his hard-drinking friend Chaim Soutine plus 
portraits of many of his other Montparnasse contemporaries such as Moise 
Kisling, Pablo Picasso, Diego Rivera, Juan Gris, Max Jacob, Blaise Cendrars, and
Jean Cocteau.

At the outset of World War I he tried to enlist in the army but was refused 
because of his poor health. Perhaps knowing that for health reasons his life 
would be short, he carried a death wish, drinking continuously and consuming 
large quantities of drugs.

Known as "Modi" to his friends, Amedeo Modigliani was an extremely handsome man 
to whom females were greatly attracted. Women came and went until Beatrice 
Hastings entered his life. She stayed for almost two years, was the subject for 
several of his portraits, including"Madame Pompadour" shown here, and the object
of much of his drunken wrath. Drunk, he was a bitter, angry person, always 
looking for a fight as was depicted in the famous drawing by Marie Vassilieff. 
Sober, he was graciously timid and charming, would quote Dante Alighieri and 
recite poems from Lautreamont's book, Les Chants de Maldoror, a copy of which he
always carried with him. When the English painter Nina Hamnett arrived in 
Montparnasse in 1914 on her first evening there the smiling man at the next 
table in the cafe introduced himself as "Modigliani, painter and Jew". They 
became great friends.

In 1916, Modigliani befriended the Polish poet and art dealer Leopold Zborovski 
and his wife Anna. Modigliani painted them several times, charging only 10 
Francs for a portrait. The following summer, the Russian sculptor Chana Orloffa 
introduced him to a beautiful 18-year-old art student named Jeanne Hibuterne who
had posed for Foujita. Jeanne came from a conservative bourgeois background and 
was renounced by her family, devout Roman Catholics for her liaison with the 
painter, who in their eyes was nothing but a debauched derelict, and Jewish 
besides. Despite her family, soon they were living together and although Jeanne 
was the love of his life, their public scenes became even more famous than 
Modigliani's personal drunken exhibitions.

On December 3, 1917, Modigliani's first one-man exhibition was opened at the 
Berthe Weill Gallery. The chief of the Paris police was scandalized by 
Modigliani's nudes and forced him to close the exhibition within a few hours 
after its opening. That same year, Modigliani received a letter from a former 
lover Simone Thirioux, a French-Canadian girl, who informed him that she had 
given birth to his son. He never acknowledged the child as his but after moving 
to Nice with Hibuterne she became pregnant and on November 29, 1918 gave birth 
to a daughter whom they would also name Jeanne.

While in Nice, a trip organized by Leopold Zborovski for Modigliani, Tsuguharu 
Foujita and other artists to try to sell their works to rich tourists, 
Modigliani managed to sell a few pictures but only for a few francs each. 
Despite this, while there he produced most of the paintings that would 
ultimately become his most popular and valued works. During his lifetime he sold
anumber of his works, but never for any great amount of money. What funds he did
receive, soon vanished for drugs and alcohol. In May of 1919 he returned to 
Paris, where, with Jeanne and their daughter, he rented an apartment in the rue 
de la Grande Chaumiere. While there, both Jeanne and Modigliani painted 
portraits of each other and of themselves.

Although he continued to paint, by then his lifestyle had taken its toll and 
Modigliani's health was deteriorating rapidly, his alcoholic blackouts becoming 
more frequent. After not being heard from for several days by his friends, his 
downstairs neighbor checked in on them and found Modigliani delirious and in 
bed, holding onto Jeanne, who was nearly nine months pregnant. A doctor was 
summoned but there was little that could be done because Modigliani was 
suffering from tubercular meningitis.

Modigliani died without regaining consciousness. There was an enormous funeral, 
attended by all of the artistic community from Montmartre and Montparnasse. 
Jeanne Hibuterne, who had been taken to her parents' home, threw herself out of 
a fifth-floor window two days after Modigliani's death, killing herself and her 
unborn child.

Modigliani was interred in Pere Lachaise Cemetery. Jeanne Hibuterne was buried 
at the Cimetiere de Bagneux, near Paris and it was not until 1930 that her 
embittered family allowed her to be moved to rest beside Modigliani.

Their orphaned 15-month-old daughter Jeanne was adopted by Modigliani's sister 
in Florence. As an adult, she would write an important biography of her father 
titled: Modigliani: Man and Myth.

Today, Modigliani is regarded as one of the greatest artists of the 20th 
century, his works on display in the great museums of the world. His sculptures 
rarely change hands and the few paintings that change hands can sell for more 
than US$15.6 million. His"Nu couche" (Sur le cote gauche) sold in November of 
2003 for US$26,887,500.
</TEXT>
