<TITLE>Jean-Baptiste Camille Corot</TITLE>
<TOPIC>art</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>Jean-Baptiste Camille Corot</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>Corot</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>French painter</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>painter</TOPIC>
<TEXT>
Jean-Baptiste Camille Corot (July 26, 1796? February 22, 1875) was a French 
landscape painter.

Camille Corot was born in Paris, in a house on the Quai by the rue du Bac, now 
demolished. His family were well-to-do bourgeois people, and whatever may have 
been the experience of some of his artistic colleagues, he never, throughout his
life, felt the want of money. He was educated at Rouen and was afterwards 
apprenticed to a draper, but hated commercial life and despised what he called 
its "business tricks," yet he faithfully remained in it until he was twenty-six, 
wher his father at last consented to his adopting the profession of art.

Corot learned little from his masters. He visited Italy on three occasions: two
of his Roman studies are now in the Louvre. He was a regular contributor to the
Salon during his lifetime, and in 1846 was decorated with the cross of the
Legion of Honour. He was promoted to be officer in 1867. His many friends
considered nevertheless that he was officially neglected, and in 1874, only a
short time before his death, they presented him with a gold medal. He died in
Paris and was buried at Pere Lachaise.

Of the painters classed in the Barbizon school it is probable that Corot will 
live the longest, and will continue to occupy the highest position. His art is 
more individual than Rousseau's, whose works are more strictly traditional; more
poetic than that of Daubigny, who is, however, Corot's greatest contemporary 
rival; and in every sense more beautiful than J. F. Millet, who thought more of 
stern truth than of aesthetic feeling.

Corot's works are somewhat arbitrarily divided into periods, but the point of 
division is never certain, as he often completed a picture years after it had 
been begun. In his first style he painted traditionally and "tight"-that is to 
say, with minute exactness, clear outlines, and with absolute definition of 
objects throughout. After his fiftieth year his methods changed to breadth of 
tone and an approach to poetic power, and about twenty years later, say from 
1865 onwards, his manner of painting became full of mystery and poetry. In the 
last ten years of his work he became the Pere Corot of the artistic circles of 
Paris, in which he was regarded with personal affection, and he was acknowledged
asone of the five or six greatest landscape painters the world has ever seen, 
along with Hobbema, Claude, Turner and Constable.

During the last few years of his life he earned large sums by his pictures, 
which became greatly sought after. In 1871 he gave #2000 for the poor of Paris 
(where he remained during the siege), and his continued charity was long the 
subject of remark. Besides landscapes, of which he painted several hundred, 
Corot produced a number of figure pictures which are much prized. These were 
mostly studio pieces, executed probably with a view to keep his hand in with 
severe drawing, rather than with the intention of producing pictures. Yet many 
of them are fine in composition, and in all cases the colour is remarkable for 
its strength and purity. Corot also executed a few etchings and pencil sketches.

In his landscape pictures Corot was more traditional in his method of work than 
is usually believed. If even his latest tree-painting and arrangement are 
compared with such a Claude as that which hangs in the Bridgewater gallery, it 
will be observed how similar is Corot's method and also how masterly are his 
results.

The works of Corot are scattered over France and the Netherlands, Britain and 
America. The following may be considered as the first half-dozen: "Une Matinee" 
(1850), now in the Louvre; "Macbeth" (1859), in the Wallace Collection; "Le Lac" 
(1861); "L'Arbre brisi" (1865); "Pastorale?-ouvenir d'Italie" (1873), in the 
Glasgow Corporation Art Gallery; "Biblis" (1875). Corot had a number of followers
who called themselves his pupils. The best known are Boudin, Lepine, Chintreuil, 
Frangais and Le Roux.
</TEXT>
