<TITLE>Leonardo da Vinci</TITLE>
<TOPIC>Leonardo da Vinci</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>art</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>Italian painter</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>da Vinci</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>Italian sculptor</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>Italian inventor</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>Italian engineer</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>Italian architect</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>painter</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>sculptor</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>inventor</TOPIC>
<TOPIC engineer</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>architect</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>Renaissance</TOPIC>
<TEXT>
Leonardo da Vinci (April 15, 1452 - May 2, 1519) was a celebrated Italian 
Renaissance architect, inventor, engineer, sculptor and painter.

Leonardo da Vinci, Renaissance-man

He has been described as the archetype of the "Renaissance Man" and as a 
universal genius. Leonardo is well known for his masterly paintings, such as "The
Last Supper" and "Mona Lisa". He is also known for his many inventions that were 
made well before their time but were never published in his lifetime. In 
addition, he helped advance the study of anatomy, astronomy, and civil
engineering.

Life

His life was described in Giorgio Vasari's biography "Vite."

Leonardo was born in Vinci, Italy. His father Ser Piero da Vinci was a well-off 
landowner or craftsman and his mother, Caterina, a peasant girl. It has been 
suggested that Caterina was a slave of middle eastern origin owned by Piero, but
the evidence is scant.

This was before modern naming conventions developed in Europe. Therefore, his 
full name was "Leonardo di ser Piero da Vinci", which means "Leonardo, son of 
Piero, from Vinci". Leonardo himself simply signed his works "Leonardo" or "Io, 
Leonardo" ("I, Leonardo"). Most authorities therefore refer to his works 
as "Leonardos," not "da Vincis." Presumably he did not use his father's name 
because he was an illegitimate child.

Leonardo grew up with his father in Florence. He was a vegetarian throughout his
life. He became an apprentice to painter Andrea del Verrocchio about 1466. Later,
he became an independent painter in Florence.

From 1482 to 1499 he worked for Ludovico Sforza, Duke of Milan and maintained 
his own workshop with apprentices there. Seventy tons of bronze that had been 
set aside for Leonardo's "Gran Cavallo" horse statue was cast into weapons for 
the Duke to save Milan from the French under Charles VIII in 1495---see also 
Italian Wars.

When the French returned under Louis XIII in 1498, Milan fell without a fight, 
overthrowing Sforza. Leonardo stayed in Milan for a time, until one morning he 
found French archers using his life-size clay model for the "Gran Cavallo" for 
target practice. He left with Salai and his friend (and inventor of double-entry
bookkeeping) Luca Pacioli for Mantua, moving on after 2 months for Venice, then 
moving again to Florence at the end of April 1500.

In Florence he entered the services of Cesare Borgia (also called "Duca Valentino"
and son of Pope Alexander VI) as military architect and engineer. In 1506 he 
returned to Milan, now in the hands of Maximilian Sforza after Swiss mercenaries
drove out the French. There he met Francesco Melzi, who would become a close 
friend and companion until Leonardo's death, and later his heir.

From 1513 to 1516 he lived in Rome, where painters like Raphael and Michelangelo
<LINK>art:pages/art/Michelangelo_Buonarroti</LINK> were active at the time; he did not 
have much contact with these artists, however.

In 1515 Francis I of France retook Milan, and Leonardo was commissioned to make
a centrepiece (of a mechanical lion) for the peace talks in Bologna between the 
French king and Pope Leo X, where he must have first met the king. In 1516, he 
entered Francis' service, being given the use of the manor house Clos Luci 
next to the king's residence at the Royal Chateau at Amboise, and receiving a 
generous pension. The king became a close friend.

He died in Cloux, France in 1519. According to his wish, 60 beggars followed his
casket. He was buried in the Chapel of Saint-Hubert in the castle of Amboise.

Leonardo appears to never have had intimate relations with women. In 1476 he was
anonymously accused of homosexual contact with a 17-year-old model, Jacopo 
Saltarelli, a notorious prostitute. He was, together with three other young men,
charged with homosexual conduct and acquitted because of lack of evidence. For a
time Leonardo and the others were under the watchful eye of Florence's "Officers 
of the Night"---a kind of Renaissance vice squad.

According to Robert Payne, a biographer of Leonardo, believes that he loved 
women and men equally. Most modern scholars believe that one of Leonardo's 
lovers was Salai, A.K.A., Gian Giacomo Caprotti. Salai was Leonardo's servant 
and assistant.

Leonardo had a great number of friends, some of which were:

Fazio Cardano - mathematician, jurist 
Francesco Melzi - painter, pupil 
Girolamo Melzi - Captain in Milanese militia 
Giovanni Francesco Rustici
Cesare Borgia - warrior 
Niccolo Machiavelli - writer 
Andrea da Ferrara 
Francesco Nani - Brother in the Franciscan Order in Brescia 
Iacomo Andrea - architect  and author 
Fra Luca Bartolomeo de Pacioli- Franciscan father 
Galeazzo da Sanseverino- Commanded ducal army of Milan, singer 
Giovanni de' Benci
Atalante Miglioretti - singer, artist, actor 
Tomasso Masini da Peretola a.k.a. Zoroastro - student of alchemy, occultist 
Bendetto Dei - writer

Leonardo is well known for his masterful paintings, such as "Last Supper"
("Ultima Cena" or "Cenacolo", in Milan), painted in 1498, and "Mona Lisa" (also 
known as "La Gioconda", now at the Louvre in Paris), painted in 1503-1506. Only 
seventeen of his paintings, and none of his statues survive. Of these paintings,
one is in North America.

Leonardo often planned grandiose paintings with many drawings and sketches, only
to leave the projects unfinished.

In 1481 he was commissioned to paint the altarpiece"The Adoration of the Magi". 
After extensive, ambitious plans and many drawings, the painting was left 
unfinished and Leonardo left for Milan.

He there spent many years making plans and models for a monumental seven-metre 
(24-foot) high horse statue in bronze ("Gran Cavallo"), to be erected in Milan. 
Because of war with France, the project was never finished. Based on private 
initiative, a similar statue was completed according to some of his plans in 
1999 in New York, given to Milan and erected there. The Hunt Museum in Limerick,
Ireland has a small bronze horse, thought to be the work of an apprentice from 
Da Vinci's original design.

Back in Florence, he was commissioned for a large public mural, the "Battle of 
Anghiari"; his rival Michelangelo was to paint the opposite wall. After 
producing a fantastic variety of studies in preparation for the work, he left 
the city, with the mural unfinished due to technical difficulties.

Science and engineering

Perhaps even more impressive than his artistic work are his studies in science 
and engineering, recorded in notebooks comprising some 13,000 pages of notes and
drawings, which fuse art and science. He was left-handed and used mirror writing 
throughout his life (this is explainable by fact that it is easier to pull a 
quill pen than to push it; by using mirror-writing, the left-handed writer is 
able to pull the pen from right to left).

His approach to science was an observatory one: he tried to understand a 
phenomenon by describing and depicting it in utmost detail, and did not 
emphasize experiments or theoretical explanations. Throughout his life, he 
planned a grand encyclopedia based on detailed drawings of everything. Since he 
lacked formal education in Latin and mathematics, Leonardo the scientist was 
mostly ignored by contemporary scholars.

He participated in autopsies and produced many extremely detailed anatomical 
drawings, planning a comprehensive work of human and comparative anatomy. Around
the year 1490, he produced a study in his sketchbook of the Canon of Proportions 
as described in recently rediscovered writings of the Roman architect 

"Leonardo da Vinci draws the human body"

His study of human anatomy led eventually to the design of the first known robot
inrecorded history. The design, which has come to be called Leonardo's robot, 
was probably made around the year 1495 but was rediscovered only in the 1950s. 
It is not known if an attempt was made to build the device.

Being fascinated by the phenomenon of flight, he produced detailed studies of 
the flight of birds, and plans for several flying machines, including a 
helicopter powered by four men (which would not have worked since it would have 
rotated) and a light hang-glider which could have flown. On January 3, 1496 he 
unsuccessfully tested a flying machine he had constructed.

In 1502 Leonardo da Vinci produced a drawing of a single span 720-foot (240 m) 
bridge as part of a civil engineering project for Sultan Beyazid II of 
Constantinople. The bridge was intended to span an inlet at the mouth of the 
Bosphorus known as the Golden Horn. It was never built, but Da Vinci's vision 
was resurrected in 2001 when a smaller bridge based on his design was 
constructed in Norway.

His notebook also contain several inventions in the military field: machine 
guns, an armored tank powered by humans or horses, cluster bombs, etc. even 
though he later held war to be the worst of human activities. Other inventions 
include a submarine, a cog-wheeled device that has been interpreted as the first
mechanical calculator, and a car powered by a spring mechanism. In his years in 
the Vatican, he planned an industrial use of solar power, by employing concave 
mirrors to heat water.

In astronomy, Leonardo believed that the Sun and Moon revolve around the Earth, 
and that the Moon reflects the sun's light due to its being covered by water.

Leonardo did not publish or otherwise distribute the contents of his notebooks. 
Most scholars believe that Leonardo wanted to publish his notebooks and make his
observations public knowledge. They remained obscure until the 19th century, and 
were not directly of value to the development of science and technology until 
that time. On this basis, L. Sprague de Camp, in his book, "The Ancient 
Engineers", considered Leonardo not the first modern engineer, but "the last of 
the ancient ones", pointing out that after Leonardo's time the practice of 
disseminating and publishing scientific discoveries began in earnest.

The Codex Leicester, one of da Vinci's notebooks, was purchased by American 
entrepreneur Bill Gates for US$30.8 million in 1994. Many of his drawings are 
held in the British Royal Collection.
</TEXT>
