<TITLE>Michelangelo Buonarroti</TITLE>
<TOPIC>art</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>Michelangelo Buonarroti</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>Michelangelo</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>Italian painter</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>Italian sculptor</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>painter</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>sculptor</TOPIC>
<TEXT>
Michelangelo di Lodovico Buonarroti Simoni (March 6, 1475 - March 18, 1564 ) was
a Renaissance painter, sculptor, poet and architect. He is famous for creating 
the fresco ceiling of the Sistine Chapel, one of the most stupendous works in 
all of Western art, as well as the Last Judgment over the altar, and "The 
Martyrdom of St. Peter" and "The Conversion of St. Paul" in the Vatican's 
Cappella Paolina; among his many sculptures are those of the Pieta and David, 
again, sublime masterpieces of their field, as well as the Virgin, Bacchus, 
Moses, Rachel, Leah, and members of the Medici family (see article for more 
information on them); he also designed the dome of St. Peter's Basilica.

Life History

Michelangelo di Lodovico Buonarroti Simoni was born on March 6th, 1475, in 
Caprese, Tuscany, Italy. Michelangelo's father, Lodovico, was the resident 
magistrate in Caprese. However, Michelangelo was raised in Florence and later 
lived with a sculptor and his wife in the town of Settignano where his father 
owned a marble quarry and a small farm.

Against his father's wishes, Michelangelo chose to be the apprentice of Domenico
Ghirlandaio for three years starting in 1488. Impressed, Domenico recommended 
him to the ruler of Florence, Lorenzo de' Medici. From 1490 to 1492, 
Michelangelo attended Lorenzo's school and during his stay, Michelangelo would 
be influenced by many prominent people who modified and expanded his ideas on 
art and even his feelings about sexuality. It was during this period that 
Michelangelo created two reliefs: "Battle of the Centaurs" and "Madonna of the 
Steps".

After the death of Lorenzo in 1492, Piero de' Medici (Lorenzo's oldest son and 
new head of the Medici family), refused to support Michelangelo's artwork. Also 
at this time, the ideas of Savonarola became popular in Florence. Under these 
two pressures, Michelangelo decided to leave Florence and stay in Bologna for 
three years. Soon afterwards, Cardinal San Giorgio purchased Michelangelo's 
marble "Cupid" and decided to summon him to Rome in 1496. Influenced by Roman 
antiquity, he produced the "Bacchus" and the "Piet`".

Four years later, Michelangelo returned to Florence where he produced arguably 
his most famous work, the marble "David". He also painted the "Holy Family of the 
Tribune".

Michelangelo was summoned back to Rome in 1503 by the newly appointed Pope 
Julius II and was commissioned to build the Pope's tomb. However, under the 
patronage of Julius II, Michelangelo had to constantly stop work on the tomb in 
order to accomplish numerous other tasks. The most famous of which was the 
monumental paintings on the ceiling of the Vatican's Sistine Chapel which took 
four years (1508 - 1512). Due to these and later interruptions, Michelangelo 
would work on the tomb for 40 years without ever finishing it.

In 1513 Pope Julius II died and his successor Pope Leo X, a Medici, commissioned
Michelangeloto reconstruct the exterior of the Church of San Lorenzo in Florence
andto adorn it with sculptures. Michelangelo agreed reluctantly, but was unable 
to accomplish this feat (the church's exterior is unadorned to this day).

In 1527, the Florentine citicens, encouraged by the sack of Rome, threw out the 
Medici and restored the republic. A siege of the city ensued, and Michelangelo 
came to the aid of his beloved Florence by working on the city's fortifications 
from 1528 to 1529. The city fell in 1530 
and the Medici were restored to power.

The fresco of the "Last Judgment" on the altar wall of the Sistine Chapel was 
commissioned by Pope Paul III and Michelangelo worked on it from 1534 to 1541. 
Then in 1547, Michelangelo was appointed architect of St. Peter's Basilica in 
the Vatican.

Seven years later, on February 18th, 1564, Michelangelo died in Rome at the age 
of 89. His life was described in Giorgio Vasari's "Vite".

Controversy, Censorship and the 'Fig-Leaf Campaign'

Michelangelo's The Last Judgement (note- the empty skin is Michelangelo's self 
portrait)

When the work was finished on the "Last Judgment" in (October 1541), Michelangelo
was accused of intolerable obscenity for his depictions of naked figures showing 
genitals (and inside a church, and in St.Peter's, the most important one). A 
violent censorship campaign was organized by Cardinal Carafa and Monsignor 
Sernini (Mantua's ambassador) to remove the frescoes, but the Pope resisted.

In coincidence with Michelangelo's death, a law was issued to cover genitals 
("Pictura in Cappella Ap.ca coopriantur"). So Daniele da Volterra, an 
apprentice of Michelangelo, covered with sort of perizomas (briefs) the genitals,
leaving unaltered the complex of bodies (see details). When the work was restored
in 1993, the restorers chose not to remove the perizomas of Daniele; however, a
faithful uncensored copy of the original, by Marcello Venusti, is now in Naples,
at the Capodimonte Museum.

Censorship always followed Michelangelo, once described as "inventor delle 
porcherie" (inventor of obscenities, in a sense that in Italian sounds like he 
had created genitals).

The "fig-leaf campaign" of the Counter Reformation to cover all representations 
of human genitals in paintings and sculptures started with Michelangelo's works.
To give two examples, the bronze statue of "Cristo della Minerva" was covered, as
it remains today, and the statue of the naked child Jesus in "Madonna of Bruges" 
(Belgium) remained covered for several decades. A similar campaign occurred in 
Victorian Britain.

Michelangelo the Man

Michelangelo, who was often arrogant with others and constantly unsatisfied with
himself, thought that art originated from inner inspiration and from culture. In 
contradiction to the ideas of his rival, Leonardo da Vinci, 
<LINK>art:pages/art/Leonardo_da_Vinci</LINK> Michelangelo saw nature as an enemy that had 
to be overcome. The figures that he created are therefore in forceful movement;
each is in its own space apart from the outside world. For Michelangelo, the job
of the sculptor is to free the forms that, he believed, were already inside the 
stone. This can most vividly be seen in his unfinished statuary figures, which 
to many appear to be struggling to free themselves from the stone.

He also instilled into his figures a sense of moral cause for action. A good 
example of this can be seen in the facial expression of his marble 
statue "David". Arguably his second most famous work (after "David") is the fresco
on the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel which is a synthesis of architecture, 
sculpture & painting. His Last Judgement, also in the Sistine Chapel, is a 
depiction of extreme crisis.

Several anecdotes reveal that Michelangelo's skill, especially in sculpture, was
deeply appreciated in his own time. It is said that when still a young 
apprentice, he had made a neoclassical statue ("Il Putto Dormiente", the 
sleeping child) of such beauty and perfection, that it was later sold in Rome as
an ancient Roman original. Another better-known anecdote claims that when 
finishing the Moses (Rome, San Pietro in Vincoli), Michelangelo violently hit 
the knee of the statue with a hammer, shouting, "Why don't you speak to me?"

Fundamental to Michelangelo's art is his love of male beauty, which attracted 
him both aesthetically, and emotionally. Such feelings caused him great anguish,
andhe expressed the struggle between platonic ideals and carnal desire in his 
sculpture, drawing and poetry.

Michelangelo developed a romantic but apparently non-sexual relationship with at
least one man, Tommaso de' Cavalieri, who was 23 years old when they met in 1532.
This infatuation caused Michelangelo to write a series of sonnets.

The homoeroticism of Michelangelo's poetry was obscured when his grand nephew, 
Michelangelo the Younger, published an edition of the poetry in 1623 with the 
gender of pronouns changed. John Addington Symonds undid this change by 
translating the original sonnets into English and writing a two-volume 
biography, published in 1893.
</TEXT>
