<TITLE>The Count of Monte Cristo</TITLE>
<TOPIC>The Count of Monte Cristo</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>Alexandre Dumas</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>novel</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>film</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>swashbuckler</TOPIC>
<TEXT>
"The Count of Monte Cristo" is a classic adventure novel by Alexandre Dumas,
"phre". It is often considered Dumas's best work, and is frequently included on 
lists of the best novels of all time. The writing of the work was completed in 
1844, and released as an 18-part series over the next two years. Dumas 
collaborated with other authors in the writing.

The story takes place in France, Italy, and islands in the Mediterranean during 
the historical events of 1814-1838 (the end of the rule of Napoleon I of France 
through the reign of Louis-Philippe of France). It is primarily concerned with 
themes of justice, vengeance, mercy and forgiveness, and is told in the style of
an adventure story.

Plot

Warning: Plot details follow.

The novel follows the adventures of the protagonist, Edmond Dantis. Dantis is a 
young, idealistic sailor with excellent prospects and a beautiful fiancee. 
However, a chance encounter brushes him with the edge of a larger framework of 
political machinations; and various individuals, for their own reasons, use 
these circumstances against him. The result of their various plots is that 
Dantis is thrown into prison indefinitely in the Chbteau d'If, near Marseille.

In prison, Dantis encounters a fellow-prisoner, the Abbi Faria with whom he 
forms a deep friendship. Faria becomes his instructor in a number of subjects, 
ranging from history and mathematics to swordplay. As a result of his 
conversations with Faria, Dantis slowly begins to piece together the plots that 
put him in his current predicament. He and Faria work long hours on an escape 
tunnel, but the elderly and infirm Faria does not survive to see its completion.
Knowing himself dying, Faria confides to Dantis the location of a great treasure
on the islet of Monte Cristo. Dantis subsequently escapes by the simple expedient
of taking the place of Faria's body.

Following his escape, Dantis retrieves the treasure and re-invents himself as 
the enigmatic Count of Monte Cristo. His long experience has changed him 
physically, aging him prematurely; mentally, giving him a much greater depth and
breadth of knowledge; and socially, with his access to great wealth. Perhaps the 
greatest change is psychological, however; from an idealistic youth he has 
become a grimly intense man, near-obsessed with his plans to repay those who 
have done him both good and ill in kind.

The story then follows Dantis' efforts, first and more briefly to reward those 
who tried to help him, then an extended campaign to gain vengeance on those who 
had him imprisoned. Using his new persona he is able to ingratiate himself with 
his enemies, where he engineers a number of subtle schemes, all with the object 
of visiting poetic justice on the heads of those he hates. He sees himself a 
sort of avenging angel, doing God's work in his own revenge.

However, matters are more complicated than Dantis anticipates. The family of one
of his enemies is connected to the family of one of his benefactors, so his dual 
campaigns of reward and punishment come into conflict. Seeing his vengeance 
begin to go farther than he had truly intended, he begins to doubt if he is 
really doing God's work. Dantis then forgoes the reminder of his plan and takes 
steps once more to balance matters. Though his revenge on his former foes is not
quite complete, he releases his final enemy and makes restitution to those caught
upin the resulting chaos, thereby applying his own standards of justice to 
himself as well. In the process, he comes to terms with his own history, and is 
able to find some forgiveness both for his enemies and for himself.

Screen adaptations

The story has been adapted to many screen versions, including several movies and
numerous TV series. It has been estimated that this story has been filmed once 
every eighteen months from 1920 on. Notable versions include: 

"The Count of Monte Cristo" (1908), silent film 
"The Count of Monte Cristo" (1913), starring James O'Neill
"The Count of Monte Cristo" (1934), starring Robert Donat 
"The Count of Monte Cristo" (1974), starring Richard Chamberlain 
"Le comte de Monte Cristo" (1999), French edition, starring Gerard Depardieu 
"The Count of Monte Cristo" (2002), starring James Caviezel, Guy Pearce, and Richard Harris.

External links

Full text of "The Count of Monte Cristo" (/http://www.gutenberg.net/etext/1184/)
from Project Gutenberg
</TEXT>
