<TITLE>The Three Musketeers</TITLE>
<TOPIC>The Three Musketeers</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>Alexandre Dumas</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>swashbuckler</TOPIC>
<TEXT>
The Three Musketeers ("Les Trois mousquetaires") is a novel by Alexandre Dumas, 
phre. It recounts the adventures of a young man called D'Artagnan after he 
leaves home to become a musketeer. D'Artagnan is not one of the musketeers of 
the title; those are his friends Athos, Porthos, and Aramis.

The story of D'Artagnan is continued in "Twenty Years After" and "The Vicomte de 
Bragelonne". Those three novels by Dumas are together known as "D'Artagnan 
Romances". "The Three Musketeers" was first published in serial form in the 
magazine "Le Sihcle" between March and July 1844. Dumas claimed it was based on 
manuscripts he had discovered in the "Bibliothhque Nationale". It was proved 
Dumas based his work on the apocryphal book "Mimoires de Monsieur d'Artagnan, 
capitaine lieutenant de la premihre compagnie des Mousquetaires du Roi" 
("Memories of Mister D'Artagnan, Lieutenant Captain of the first company of the 
King's Musketeers") by Gatien de Courtilz (Cologne, 1700). The book was borrowed 
in the Marseilles public library, and the card-index remains to this day (Dumas 
kept the book when he went back to Paris).

It covers the adventures of D'Artagnan and his friends in 1625, as they are 
involved in intrigues involving the weak King Louis XIII of France, his powerful
and cunning advisor Cardinal Richelieu, the beautiful Queen Anne of Austria, her 
English lover, George Villiers, 1st Duke of Buckingham, and the siege of the 
rebellious Huguenot city of La Rochelle.

The novel has been filmed many times. Notable film versions include: "Les Trois 
mousquetaires" (1921)- a French silent film version featuring Aimi Simon-Girard 
as D'Artagnan and Claude Mirelle as Milady de Winter. A blockbuster of its day, 
which spawned a number of sequels (an adaptation of "Twenty Years After" was 
released the following year); remade as a talkie in 1933 with the same director 
and many of the same cast. "The Three Musketeers" (1921)- a silent film version 
starring Douglas Fairbanks, Sr.

"The Three Musketeers" (1935)- b/w version for RKO starring Paul Lukas and 
Walter Abel. "The Three Musketeers" (1939)- comedy version starring Don Ameche 
and the Ritz Brothers

"The Three Musketeers" (1948)- directed by George Sidney for MGM; starring Gene 
Kelly, Van Heflin, Angela Lansbury, Lana Turner, June Allyson. "The Three 
Musketeers" (1973) and "The Four Musketeers" (1974)- a more-than-usually-complete
adaptation directed by Richard Lester from a screenplay by George MacDonald 
Fraser; starring Michael York as D'Artagnan, Oliver Reed as Athos, Frank Finlay 
as Porthos, Richard Chamberlain as Aramis, Charlton Heston as Richelieu, Faye 
Dunaway as Milady de Winter, and Raquel Welch as Constance Bonacieux. The team 
reassembled fifteen years later for a film version of "Twenty Years After", 
released in 1989 under the title "The Return of the Musketeers". "The Three 
Musketeers" (1993)- a Disney production starring Charlie Sheen as Aramis, Kiefer
Sutherland as Athos, Chris O'Donnell as D'Artagnan, Oliver Platt as Porthos, and 
Tim Curry as Richelieu. Bryan Adams wrote the hit "All For Love" for the 
movie's soundtrack, performing it with Rod Stewart and Sting.
</TEXT>
