<TITLE>Voltaire</TITLE>
<TOPIC>French novelist</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>French playwright</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>novelist</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>writer</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>playwright</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>Voltaire</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>Frangois-Marie Arouet</TOPIC>
<TEXT>
Frangois-Marie Arouet (November 21, 1694- May 30, 1778), better known by the 
pen-name Voltaire, was a French Enlightenment writer and philosopher.

Biography

He was born in Paris to Frangois Arouet and Marie-Marguerite Daumart or 
D'Aumard. Both parents were of Poitevin extraction, but the Arouets were long 
established in Paris, the grandfather being a prosperous tradesman. The family 
appears to have always belonged to the yeoman-tradesman class; their special 
home was the town of Saint-Loup.

Voltaire was the fifth child of his parents, preceded by twin boys (one of whom 
survived), a girl, Marguerite-Catherine, and another boy who died young. 
Voltaire's mother died when he was seven years old, she was probably the chief 
cause of his early introduction to high society, the Abbi de Chbteauneuf (his 
sponsor in more ways than one) having been her friend. His father appears to 
have been strict, but neither inhospitable nor tyrannical. Marguerite Arouet, of
whom her younger brother was very fond, married early, her husband's family name
being Mignot; the elder brother, Armand, was a strong Jansenist and had a poor 
relationship with Frangois.

The Abbi de Chbteauneuf instructed Frangois in "les belles lettres" and deism,
and the child showed a faculty for facile verse-making. Aged ten he was sent to 
the Collhge Louis-le-Grand, which was under the management of Jesuits, and 
remained there till 1711. As part of his general liberalism he depreciated the 
education he had received; but it seems to have been a sound one which formed 
the basis of his extraordinarily wide, though not always accurate, collection of
knowledge,it also disciplined and exercised his literary faculty and judgement. 
There is little doubt that the great attention bestowed on acting---the Jesuits 
kept up the Renaissance practice of turning schools into theatres for the 
performance of plays both in Latin and in the vernacular?---had much to do with 
Voltaire's lifelong devotion to the stage.

It was in his earliest school years that the celebrated presentation of him, by 
his godfather, to Ninon de Lenclos took place, for Ninon died in 1705. She left 
him two thousand francs "to buy books with". Some curious oddities are recorded 
of his life, one being that in the terrible famine year of Malplaquet a hundred 
francs a year were added to the usual boarding expenses, and yet the boys had to
eat "pain bis". In August 1711, at the age of seventeen, he came home and the 
usual battle followed between a son who desired no profession but literature and
a father who refused to consider literature a profession at all so Voltaire 
studied law, at least nominally. The Abbi de Chbteauneuf died before his godson 
left school, but he had already introduced him to the famous and dissipated 
coterie of the Temple, of which the grand prior Vendtme was the head, and the 
poets Chaulieu and La Fare were the chief literary stars. Voltaire's father 
tried to remove him from such society by sending him first to Caen and then, in 
the suite of the marquis de Chbteauneuf, the abbi's brother, to The Hague. Here 
he met Olympe Dunoyer ("Pimpette"), a girl of respectable character and not bad 
connections, but a Protestant, penniless and daughter of a literary lady whose 
reputation was not spotless. The mother discouraged the affair and, though 
Voltaire tried to avail himself of the mania for proselytizing which then 
distinguished France, his father stopped any idea of a match by procuring 
a "lettre de cachet", though, however, he never used it.

Voltaire was sent home and, for a time, pretended to work in a Parisian lawyer's
office but he again manifested a faculty for getting into trouble---this time in 
the still more dangerous way of writing libelous poems---so that his father was 
glad to send him to stay for nearly a year (1714-15) with Louis de Caumartin, 
marquis de Saint-Ange, in the country. Here he was still supposed to study law 
but devoted himself in part to literary essays and in part to storing up his 
immense treasure of gossiping history. Almost exactly at the time of the death 
of Louis XIV he returned to Paris, to fall once more into literary and Templar 
society and to make the tragedy of "Oedipe", which he had already written, 
privately known. He was introduced to a less questionable and even more 
distinguished coterie than Vendtme's, to the famous" court of Sceaux", the 
circle of the beautiful and ambitious duchesse du Maine. It seems that Voltaire 
lent himself to the duchess's frantic hatred of the regent, Philippe II of 
Orlians, and helped compose lampoons on him. In May 1716 he was exiled, first to
Tulle, then to Sully, later, having been allowed to return, he was suspected of 
having been concerned in the composition of two violent libels---one in Latin 
and one in French---called, from their first words, the "Puero Regnante" and the
"J'ai vu". Inveigled by a spy named Beauregard into a real or burlesque 
confession he was sent to the Bastille on May 16, 1717, here he recast "Oedipe",
began the "Henriade" and decided to change his name.

Ever after his exit from the Bastille in April 1718 he was known as "Arouet de 
Voltaire", or simply "Voltaire", though legally he never abandoned his 
patronymic. The origin of the name has been much debated and attempts have been 
made to show that it existed in the Daumart pedigree or in some territorial 
designation. Some maintain that it was an abbreviation of a childish 
nickname,"le petit volontaire". The balance of opinion has, however, always 
inclined to the hypothesis of an anagram on the name "Arouet le jeune" or "Arouet
l.j.", 'u' being changed to 'v' and 'j' to'i' according to the ordinary rules of
the game.

A further "exile" at Chbtenay and elsewhere followed the imprisonment however, 
though Voltaire was admitted to an audience by the regent and treated 
graciously, he was not trusted. "Oedipe" was performed at the Thibtre Frangais on
November 18 and was well received, though a rivalry grew between parties 
assisting its success. It had a run of forty-five nights and brought the author 
not a little profit, with these gains Voltaire seems to have begun his long 
series of successful financial speculations.

In the spring of the next year the production of Lagrange-Chancel's libels, 
entitled the "Philip piques", again brought suspicion on Voltaire. He was 
informally exiled, and spent much time with Marshal Villars, again increasing 
his store of "reminiscences". He returned to Paris in the winter and his second 
play, "Artemire", was produced in February 1720. It was a failure, and though it 
was recast with some success, Voltaire never published it as a whole and used 
parts of it in other work. He again spent much of his time with Villars, 
listening to the marshal's stories and making harmless love to the duchess.

In December 1721 his father died leaving him property, rather more than four 
thousand livres a year, which was soon increased by a pension of half the amount
from the regent. In return for this, or in hopes of more, he offered himself as a
spy---or at any rate as a secret diplomatist---to Dubois, but meeting his old 
enemy Beauregardin one of the minister's rooms and making an offensive remark, 
he was waylaid by Beauregard some time after in a less privileged place and 
soundly beaten.

His visiting espionage, as unkind critics put it---his secret diplomatic mission,
as he would have liked to have it put himself---began in the summer of 1722 and he
setout for it in company with a certain Madame de Rupelmonde, to whom he, as 
usual, made love, taught deism and served as an amusing travelling companion. He
stayed at Cambrai for some time, where European diplomatists were still in full 
session, journeyed to Brussels, where he met and quarrelled with Jean-Jacques 
Rousseau, went on to the Hague and then returned. The "Henriade" had got on 
considerably during the journey and, according to his lifelong habit, the poet, 
with the help of his friend Thiiriot and others, had been "working the oracle" of
puffery. During the late autumn and winter of 1722-1723 he lived chiefly in 
Paris, taking a kind of lodging in the town house of M. de Bernijres, a nobleman
of Rouen and endeavouring to procure a "privilege" for his poem. In this he was 
disappointed but he had the work printed at Rouen nevertheless and spent the 
summer of 1723 revising it. In November he caught smallpox and was seriously 
ill, so that the book was not given to the world till the spring of 1724 (and 
then of course, as it had no privilege, appeared privately). Almost at the same 
time, on the 4th of March, his third tragedy, "Marianne", appeared and was well 
received at first but underwent complete damnation before the curtain fell. The 
regent had died shortly before, not to Voltaire's advantage; for he had been a 
generous patron. Voltaire had made, however, a useful friend in another "grand 
seigneur", as profligate and nearly as intelligent, the duke of Richelieu, and 
with him he passed 1724 and the next year chiefly recasting Marianne (which was
now successful), but also writing the comedy of "L'Indiscret" and courting the 
queen.

Exile to England

The end of 1725 brought a disastrous close to this period of his life. He was 
insulted by the chevalier de Rohan, replied with his usual sharpness of tongue, 
and shortly afterwards, when dining with the duke of Sully, was called out and 
bastonadoed by the chevalier's hirelings, Rohan himself looking on.

Voltaire's friend Nicolas-Claude Thieriot reported that Rohan had started 
with: "Monsieur de Voltaire, Monsieur Arouet, exactly what is your name?" "I 
myself do not bear a great name," he said,"but I know how to honor the one I 
carry." Sort of a 'I know you are, but what am I?'

At the Duc de Sully's, Voltaire was called to the front door. When he was on the
street he was invited to a carriage stationed there, whereupon he was seized by 
two hoodlums and beaten with a cudgel while Rohan, who had hired the thugs, sat 
in his coach and watched. Rohan would allegedly have commanded, "Don't hit him on
the head, something good may come out of it."

As a paid entertainer, this was his reputation, nobody would take his part, and 
at last, nearly three months after the outrage, he challenged Rohan, who 
accepted the challenge, but on the morning appointed for the duel Voltaire was 
arrested and sent for the second time to the Bastille. He was kept in 
confinement a fortnight, and was then packed off to England in accordance with 
his own request. Voltaire revenged himself on the duke of Sully for his conduct 
towards his guest by cutting Maximilien de Bithune's name out of the "Henriade".

An anecdote describes how, one day in London, he was surrounded by an angry mob 
calling "Hang him! Hang the Frenchman!". Voltaire bravely faced the mob and 
called out: "Men of England! You wish to kill me because I am a Frenchman. Am I 
not punished enough in not being born an Englishman?" The crowd cheered him and 
escorted him safely back to the inn where he was staying.

No competent judges have ever mistaken the importance of Voltaire's visit to 
England, and the influence it exercised on his future career. In the first 
place, the ridiculous and discreditable incident of the beating by Rohan had 
time to blow over; in the second, England was a very favourable place for 
Frenchmen of note to make money; in the third, and most important of all, his 
contact with a people then far more different in every conceivable way from 
their neighbours than any two peoples of Europe are different now, acted as a 
sovereign tonic and stimulant on his intellect and literary faculty. While in 
England Voltaire was attracted to the philosophy of John Locke and ideas of the 
great scientist Sir Isaac Newton. He studied England's constitutional monarchy, 
its religious tolerance, its philosophical rationalism and most importantly 
the"natural sciences".

Before the English visit Voltaire had been an elegant trifler. He returned from 
that visit one of the foremost literary men in Europe, with views on all "les 
grands sujets", and with a solid stock of money. The visit lasted about three 
years, from 1726 to 1729; and, as if to make the visitor's luck certain, George 
I died and George II succeeded soon after his arrival. The new king was not fond
of "boetry" [poetry?], but Queen Caroline was, and international jealousy was 
pleased at the thought of welcoming a distinguished exile from French 
illiberality.

Horace Walpole, George Bubb Dodington, Bolingbroke, William Congreve, the 
Duchess of Marlborough, and Alexander Pope were among his English friends. He 
made acquaintance with, and at least tried to appreciate, the work of William 
Shakespeare. He was much struck by English manners and by English toleration for
personal free thought and eccentricity, and gained some thousands of pounds from 
an authorized English edition of the "Henriade", dedicated to the queen. But he 
visited Paris now and then without permission, and his mind was always set 
thereon. He gained full licence to return in the spring of 1729.

Return to Paris

He was full of literary projects, and immediately after his return is said to 
have increased his fortune immensely by a lucky lottery speculation. 
The "Henriade" was at last licensed in France; "Brutus", a play which he had 
printed in England, was accepted for performance, but kept back for a time by 
the author; and he began the celebrated poem of the "Pucelle", the amusement and 
the torment of great part of his life. But he had great difficulties with two of
his chief works which were ready to appear, "Charles XII" and the "Lettres sur les 
Anglais". With both he took all imaginable pains to avoid offending the 
censorship; for Voltaire had, more than any other man who ever lived, the 
ability and the willingness to stoop to conquer.

At the end of 1730 "Brutus" was actually staged. In the spring of the next year,
Voltairewent to Rouen to get"Charles XII" surreptitiously printed. In 1732 
another tragedy, "Eriphile", appeared, with the same kind of halting success 
which had distinguished the appearance of its elder sisters since "Oedipe". At 
last, on the 13th of August 1732, he produced "Zaire", the best (with "Mirope") 
of all his plays, and one of the ten or twelve best plays of the whole French 
classical school. Its motive was borrowed to some extent from "Othello". In the 
following winter the death of the comtesse de Fontaine-Martel, whose guest and 
supposed lover he had been, turned him out of a comfortable abode. He then took 
lodgings with an agent of his, one Demoulin, in an out-of-the-way part of Paris,
andwas, for some time at least, as much occupied with contracts, speculation and
allsorts of means of gaining money as with literature.

In the middle of this period, in 1733, two important books, the "Lettres 
philosophiques sur les Anglais" and the "Temple du goat" appeared. Both were 
likely to make bad blood, for the latter was, under the mask of easy verse, a 
satire on contemporary French literature, especially on Rousseau, and the former
was, in the guise of a criticism or rather panegyric of English ways, an attack 
on everything established in the church and state of France. It was published 
with certain "remarks" on Blaise Pascal, more offensive to orthodoxy than itself,
and no mercy was shown to it. The book was condemned (June 10, 1734), the copies 
seized and burned, a warrant issued against the author, and his dwelling 
searched. He himself was safe in the independent duchy of Lorraine with Emilie 
de Breteuil, marquise du Chatelet, with whom he began to be intimate in 1733; he
hadnow taken up his abode with her at the chbteau of Cirey.

Cirey

If the English visit may be regarded as having finished Voltaire's education, 
the Cirey residence was the first stage of his literary manhood. He had written 
important and characteristic work before, but had not decided a direction. He 
now obtained a settled home for many years and, taught by his numerous brushes 
with the authorities, he began his future habit of keeping out of personal 
harm's way, and of at once denying any awkward responsibility, which made him 
for nearly half a century at once the leader of European heretics in regard to 
all established ideas. It was not till the summer of 1734 that Cirey, a 
half-dismantled country house on the borders of Champagne, France and Lorraine, 
was fitted up with Voltaire's money and became the headquarters of himself, of 
his hostess, and now and then of her accommodating husband.

Many pictures of the life here, some of them not a little malicious, survive. 
Emilie's temper was violent, and after a time she sought lovers who were not so 
much "des ciribraux" as Voltaire. Nevertheless, it provided him with a safe and 
comfortable retreat, and with every opportunity for literary work. In March 1735
thehat was formally taken off him, and he was at liberty to return to Paris, a 
liberty of which he availed himself sparingly. At Cirey he wrote indefatigably 
and did not neglect business. The principal literary results of his early years 
here were the "Discours en vers sur l'Homme", the play of Aizire and "L'Enfant 
prodigue" (1736), and a long treatise on the Newtonian system which he and 
Madame du Chatelet wrote together. But, as usual, Voltaire's extraordinary 
literary industry was shown rather in a vast amount of fugitive writings than in
substantive works, though for the whole space of his Cirey residence he was 
engaged in writing, adding to, and altering the"Puerile".

In the very first days at Cirey he had written a pamphlet with the title 
of "Treatise on Metaphysics". In March 1736 he received his first letter from 
Frederick II of Prussia, then crown prince. He was soon again in trouble, this 
time for the poem, "Le Mondain", and he at once crossed the frontier and made for
Brussels.He spent about three months in the Low Countries, but in March 1737 
returned to Cirey and continued writing, making experiments in physics (he had 
at this time a large laboratory), and busying himself with iron-founding, the 
chief industry of the district.

The best-known accounts of Cirey life, those of Madame de Grafigny, date from 
the winter of 1738-39; they are very amusing, depicting the frequent quarrels 
between Madame du Chatelet and Voltaire, his intense suffering under criticism, 
his constant dread of the surreptitious publication of the "Pucelle" (which 
nevertheless he could not keep his hands from writing or his tongue from 
reciting to his visitors), and so forth. The chief and most galling of his 
critics at this time was the Abbi Desfontaines, and the chief of Desfontaines's 
attacks was entitled "La Voltairomanie", in reply to a libel of Voltaire's 
called "Le Priservatif". Both combatants had, according to the absurd habit of 
the time, to disown their works, Desfontaines's disavowal being formal and 
needing all Voltaire's own influence both at home and abroad to bring it about. 
For he had as little notion of tolerance towards others as of dignity in 
himself.

In April 1739 a journey was made to Brussels, to Paris, and then again to 
Brussels, which was the headquarters for a considerable time, owing to some law 
affairs, of the Du Chatelets. Frederick, now king of Prussia, made not a few 
efforts to get Voltaire away from Madame du Chatelet, but unsuccessfully, and 
the king earned the lady's cordial hatred by persistently refusing or omitting 
to invite her.

At last, in September 1740, master and pupil met for the first time at Cleves, 
an interview followed three months later by a longer visit. Brussels was again 
the headquarters in 1741, by which time Voltaire had finished the best and the 
second or third best of his plays, "Mirope" and "Mahomet". "Mahomet" was first 
performed at Lille in that year; it did not appear in Paris till August next 
year, and "Mirope" not till 1743. This last was, and deserved to be, the most 
successful of its author's whole theatre. It was in this same year that he 
received the singular diplomatic mission to Frederick which nobody seems to have
takenseriously, and after his return the oscillation between Brussels, Cirey and
Pariswas resumed.

During these years much of the "Essai sur les moeurs" and the "Sihcle de Louis 
XIV" was composed. He also returned, not too well advisedly, to the business of 
courtiership, which he had given up since the death of the regent. He was much 
employed, owing to Richelieu's influence, in the fetes of the dauphin's 
marriage, and was rewarded through the influence of Madame de Pompadour on New
Year's Day 1745 by the appointment to the post of historiographer-royal, once 
jointly held by Racine and Boileau. The situation itself and its accompanying 
privileges were what Voltaire chiefly aimed at, but there was a salary of two 
thousand livres attached, and he had the year before come in for three times as 
much by the death of his brother.

In the same year he wrote a poem on Fontenoy, he received medals from the pope 
and dedicated "Mahomet" to him, and he wrote court divertissements and other 
things to admiration. But he was not a thoroughly skilful courtier, and one of 
the best known of Voltairians is the contempt or at least silence with which 
Louis XV received the maladroit and almost insolent inquiry "Trajan est-il 
content?" addressed in his hearing to Richelieu at the close of a piece in which
the emperor had appeared with a transparent reference to the king. All this 
assentation had at least one effect. He, who had been for years admittedly the 
first writer in France, had been repeatedly passed over in elections to the 
Academy.

He was at last elected in the spring of 1746, and received on the May 9. Then 
the tide began to turn. His favour at court had naturally exasperated his 
enemies; it had not secured him any real friends, and even a gentlemanship of 
the chamber was no solid benefit, except from the money point of view. He did 
not indeed hold it very long, but was permitted to sell it for a large sum, 
retaining the rank and privileges. He had various proofs of the instability of 
his hold on the king during 1747 and in 1748. He once lay in hiding for two 
months with the duchesse du Maine at Sceaux, where were produced the comedietta 
of "La Prude" and the "Tragedie de Rome sauvie", and afterwards for a time lived 
chiefly at Luniville; here Madame du Chatelet had established herself at the 
court of King Stanislaus I of Poland, and carried on a liaison with the 
soldier-poet, Jean Frangois de Saint-Lambert, an officer in the king's guard. In
September1749 she died after the birth of a child.

The death of Madame du Chatelet is another turning-point in the history of 
Voltaire. He was fifty-five, but he had nearly thirty years more to live, and he
had learnt much during what may be called his Cirey cohabitation. For some time, 
however, after Madame du Chatelet's death he was in a state of pitiable 
unsettlement. After removing his goods from Cirey, he hired the greater part of 
the Chatelet town house, and then the whole. He had some idea of settling down 
in Paris, and might perhaps have done so if mischief had not been the very 
breath of his nostrils. He went on writing satires like "Zadig".

He engaged in a foolish and undignified struggle with Cribillon "phre" (not 
"fils"), a rival set up against him by Madame de Pompadour, but a dramatist who,
in part of one play, "Rhadamiste et Zenobie", has struck a note of tragedy in 
the grand Cornelian strain, which Voltaire could never hope to echo. "Semirame" 
(1748), "Oreste" (1750) and "Rome sauvie" itself were all products of this 
rivalry. He used the most extraordinary efforts to make himself more popular 
than he was, but he could not help being uncomfortable.

Frederick the Great

All this time Frederick of Prussia had been continuing his invitations. Voltaire
left Paris on the 15th of June 1751, and reached Berlin on the 10th of July. This
Berlin visit is more or less familiar to English readers from the two great 
essays of Macaulay and Carlyle as well as from the Frederick of the latter. But 
these two masters of English were not perhaps the best qualified to relate the 
story. Both were unjust to Voltaire, and Macaulay was unjust to Frederick as 
well.

At first the king behaved altogether like a king to his guest. He pressed him to
remain; he gave him (the words are Voltaire's own) one of his orders, twenty 
thousand francs a year, and four thousand additional for his niece, Madame 
Jenis, in case she would come and keep house for her uncle. Voltaire's conduct 
was from the first Voltairean. He insisted for the consent of his own king, 
which was given without delay. But Frenchmen, always touchy on such a point, 
regarded Voltaire as something of a deserter; and it was not long before he 
bitterly repented his desertion, though his residence in Prussia lasted nearly 
three years. It was quite impossible that Voltaire and Frederick should get on 
together for long. Voltaire was not humble enough to be a mere butt, as many of 
Frederick's led poets were; he was not enough of a gentleman to hold his own 
place with dignity and discretion; he was constantly jealous both of his equals 
in age and reputation, such as Maupertuis, and of his juniors and inferiors, 
such as Baculard D'Arnaud. He was restless, and in a way Bohemian. Frederick, 
though his love of teasing for teasing's sake has been exaggerated by Macaulay, 
was a martinet of the first water, had a sharp though one-sided idea of justice,
andhad not the slightest intention of allowing Voltaire to insult or to 
tyrannize over his other guests and servants.

Voltaire had not been in the country six months before he engaged in a 
discreditable piece of financial gambling with Hirsch, the Dresden Jew. He was 
accused of forgery-- of altering a paper signed by Hirsch after he had signed 
it. The king's disgust at this affair (which came to an open scandal before the 
tribunals) was so great that he was on the point of ordering Voltaire out of 
Prussia, and Darget the secretary had trouble resolving the matter (February 
1711). However, he succeeded in finishing and printing the "Sihcle de Louis XIV",
while the "Dictionnaire philosophique" is said to have been devised and begun at 
Potsdam.

In the early autumn of 1751 one of the king's parasites, and a man of much more 
talent than is generally allowed, horrified Voltaire by telling him that 
Frederick had in conversation applied to him (Voltaire) a proverb about "sucking 
the orange and flinging away its skin", and about the same time the dispute with
Pierrede Maupertuis, which had more than anything else to do with his exclusion 
from Prussia, came to a head. Maupertuis got into a dispute with one Konig. The 
king took his president's part; Voltaire took Konig's. But Maupertuis must needs
write his Letters, and thereupon (1752) appeared one of Voltaire's most famous, 
though perhaps not one of his most read works, the "Histoire du docteur Akakia et
dunatif de Saint-Malo". Even Voltaire did not venture to publish this lampoon on
a great official of a prince so touchy as the king of Prussia without some 
permission, and if all tales are true, he obtained this by another piece of 
something like forgery---getting the king to endorse a totally different pamphlet 
on its last leaf, and affixing that last leaf to "Akakia". Of this Frederick was 
not aware; but he did get some wind of the diatribe itself, sent for the author,
heard it read to his own great amusement, and either actually burned the 
manuscript or believed that it was burnt. In a few days printed copies appeared.

Frederick did not like disobedience, but he still less liked being made a fool 
of, and he put Voltaire under arrest. But again the affair blew over, the king 
believing that the edition of "Akakia" confiscated in Prussia was the only one. 
Alas! Voltaire had sent copies away; others had been printed abroad; and the 
thing was irrecoverable. It could not be proved that he had ordered the 
printing, and all Frederick could do was to have the pamphlet burnt by the 
hangman. Things were now drawing to a crisis.

One day Voltaire sent his orders back; the next Frederick returned them, but 
Voltaire had quite made up his mind to fly. A kind of reconciliation occurred in
March, and after some days of good-fellowship Voltaire at last obtained the 
long-sought leave of absence and left Potsdam on the 26th of the month (1753). 
It was nearly three months afterwards that the famous, ludicrous and brutal 
arrest was made at Frankfurt, on the persons of himself and his niece, who had 
met him meanwhile.

There was some faint excuse for Frederick's wrath. In the first place, the poet 
chose to linger at Leipzig. In the second place, in direct disregard of a 
promise given to Frederick, a supplement to "Akakia" appeared, more offensive 
than the main text. From Leipzig, after a month's stay, Voltaire moved to Gotha.
Once more, on the 25th of May, he moved on to Frankfurt. Frankfurt, nominally a 
free city, but with a Prussian resident who did very much what he pleased, was 
not like Gotha and Leipzig. An excuse was provided in the fact that the poet had
a copy of some unpublished poems of Frederick's, and as soon as Voltaire arrived 
hands were laid on him, at first with courtesy enough. The resident, Freytag, 
was not a very wise person (though he probably did not, as Voltaire would have 
it, spell "poisie" (poetry) "poishie"); constant references to Frederick were 
necessary; and the affair was prolonged so that Madame Denis had time to join 
her uncle. At last Voltaire tried to steal away. He was followed, arrested, his 
niece seized separately, and sent to join him in custody; and the two, with the 
secretary Collini, were kept close prisoners at an inn called the Goat.

This situation was at last put an end to by the city authorities, who probably 
felt that they were not playing a very creditable part. Voltaire left Frankfurt 
on the 7th of July, travelled safely to Mainz, and thence to Mannheim, 
Strassburg and Colmar. The last-named place he reached (after a leisurely 
journey and many honours at the little courts just mentioned) at the beginning 
of October, and here he proposed to stay the winter, finish his Annals of the 
Empire and look about him.

Voltaire's second stage was now over. Even now, however, in his sixtieth year, 
it required some more external pressure to induce him to make himself 
independent. He had been, in the first blush of his Frankfort disaster, refused,
or at least not granted, permission even to enter France proper. At Colmar he was
not safe, especially when in January 1754 a pirated edition of the "Essai sur les 
moeurs", written long before, appeared. Permission to establish himself in 
France was now absolutely refused. Nor did an extremely offensive performance of
Voltaire's---the solemn partaking of the Eucharist at Colmar after due 
confession---at all mollify his enemies. His exclusion from France, however, was 
chiefly metaphorical, and really meant exclusion from Paris and its 
neighbourhood. In the summer he went to Plombihres, and after returning to 
Colmar for some time, journeyed in the beginning of winter to Lyons, and thence 
in the middle of December to Geneva.

Voltaire had no plans to remain in the city, and immediately bought a country 
house just outside the gates, which he named "Les Dilices". He was here 
practically at the meeting-point of four distinct jurisdiction---?Geneva, the 
canton Vaud, Sardinia, and France, while other cantons were within easy reach; 
and he bought other houses dotted about these territories, so as never to be 
without a refuge close at hand in case of sudden storms. At Les Dilices he set 
up a considerable establishment, which his great wealth made him able easily to 
afford. He kept open house for visitors; he had printers close at hand in 
Geneva; he fitted up a private theatre in which he could enjoy what was perhaps 
the greatest pleasure of his whole life---acting in a play of his own, 
stage-managed by himself. His residence at Geneva brought him into 
correspondence (at first quite amicable) with the most famous of her citizens, 
Rousseau. His "Orphelin de Chine", performed at Paris in 1755, was very well 
received; the notorious "La Pucelle" appeared in the same year. The earthquake at
Lisbon, which appalled other people, gave Voltaire an excellent opportunity for 
ridiculing the beliefs of the orthodox, first in verse (1756) and later in the 
unsurpassable tale of "Candide" (1759).

All was, however, not yet quite smooth with him. Geneva had a law expressly 
forbidding theatrical performances in any circumstances whatever. Voltaire had 
infringed this law already as far as private performances went, and he had 
thought of building a regular theatre, not indeed at Geneva but at Lausanne. In 
July 1755 a very polite and, as far as Voltaire was concerned, indirect 
resolution of the Consistory declared that in consequence of these proceedings 
of the Sieur de Voltaire the pastors should notify their flocks to abstain, and 
that the chief syndic should be informed of the Consistory's perfect confidence 
that the edicts would be carried out. Voltaire obeyed this hint as far as Les 
Dilices was concerned, and consoled himself by having the performances in his 
Lausanne house. But he never was the man to take opposition to his wishes either
quietlyor without retaliation. He undoubtedly instigated d'Alembert to include a
censureof the prohibition in his Encyclopidie article on "Geneva," a proceeding 
which provoked Rousseau's celebrated "Lettre ` D'Alembert sur les spectacles". As
forhimself, he looked about for a place where he could combine the social 
liberty of France with the political liberty of Geneva, and he found one.

At the end of 1758 he bought the considerable property of Ferney, on the shore 
of the lake, about four miles from Geneva, and on French soil. At Les Dilices 
(which he sold in 1765) he had become a householder on no small scale; at 
Ferney (which he increased by other purchases and leases) he became a complete 
country gentleman, and was henceforward known to all Europe as squire of Ferney.
Manyof the most celebrated men of Europe visited him there, and large parts of 
his usual biographies are composed of extracts from their accounts of Ferney. 
His new occupations by no means quenched his literary activity. He did not make 
himself a slave to his visitors, but reserved much time for work and for his 
immense correspondence, which had for a long time once more included Frederick, 
the two getting on very well when they were not in contact.

Above all, he now being comparatively secure in position, engaged much more 
strongly in public controversies, and resorted less to his old labyrinthine 
tricks of disavowal, garbled publication and private libel. The suppression of 
the Encyclopidie, to which he had been a considerable contributor, and whose 
conductors were his intimate friends, drew from him a shower of lampoons 
directed now at "l'infbme". These were directed at literary victims such as 
Lefranc de Pompignan or Palissot. Further lampoons were directed at Friron, an 
excellent critic and a dangerous writer, who had attacked Voltaire from the 
conservative side, and at whom the patriarch of Ferney, as he now began to be 
called, levelled in return the very inferior farce-lampoon of "L'Ecossaise", of 
the first night of which Friron himself did an admirably humorous criticism.

How he built a church and got into trouble in so doing at Ferney, how he put "Deo
erexit Voltaire" on it (1760-61) and obtained a relic from the pope for his new 
building, how he entertained a grand-niece of Corneille, and for her benefit 
wrote his well-known "commentary" on that poet, are matters of interest, indeed. 
Here, too, he began that series of interferences on behalf of the oppressed and 
the ill-treated which, whatever mixture of motives may have prompted it, is an 
honour to his memory. Volumes and almost libraries have been written on the 
Calas affair, and we can but refer here to the only less famous cases of Sirven 
(very similar to that of Calas, though no judicial murder was actually 
committed), Espinasse (who had been sentenced to the galleys for harbouring a 
Protestant minister), Lally (the son of the unjustly treated but not blameless 
Irish-French commander in India), D'Etalonde (the companion of La Barre) 
Montbailli and others.

In 1768 he entered into controversy with the bishop of the diocese; he had 
differences with the superior landlord of part of his estate, the president De 
Brosses; and he engaged in a long and tedious return match with the republic of 
Geneva. But the general events of this Ferney life are somewhat of that happy 
kind which are no events.

In this way Voltaire, who had been an old man when he established himself at 
Ferney (now Ferney-Voltaire), became a very old one almost without noticing it. 
The death of Louis XV and the accession of Louis XVI excited even in his aged 
breast the hope of re-entering Paris, but he did not at once receive any 
encouragement, despite the reforming ministry of Turgot. A much more solid gain 
to his happiness was the adoption, or practical adoption, in 1776 of Reine 
Philiberte de Varicourt, a young girl of noble but poor family, whom Voltaire 
rescued from the convent, installed in his house as an adopted daughter, and 
married to the marquis de Villette. Her pet name was "Belle et Bonne", and 
nobody had more to do with the happiness of the last years of the "patriarch" 
than she had.

It is doubtful whether his last and fatal visit to Paris was due to his own wish
or to the instigation of his niece, Madame Denis; but this lady---a woman of 
disagreeable temper, especially to her inferiors---appears to have been rather 
hardly treated by Voltaire's earlier, and sometimes by his later, biographers. 
The suggestion which has been made that the success of Beaumarchais piqued him 
has nothing impossible in it. At any rate he had, at the end of 1777 and the 
beginning of 1778, been carefully finishing a new tragedy "Irene" for production 
in the capital. He started on February 5, and five days later arrived at the 
city which he had not seen for eight-and-twenty years.

He was received with immense rejoicings, not indeed directly by the court, but 
by the Academy, by society and by all the more important foreign visitors. About
a fortnight after his arrival, age and fatigue made him seriously ill, and a 
confessor was sent for. But he recovered, scoffed at himself as usual, and 
prepared more eagerly than ever for the first performance of "Irene", on the 16th
of March. At the end of the month he was able to attend a performance of it, 
which was a kind of apotheosis. He was crowned with laurel in his box, amid the 
plaudits of the audience, and did not seem to be the worse for it. He even began
to proceed with another tragedy---"Agathocle"---and attended several Academic 
meetings. But such proceedings in the case of a man of eighty-four were 
impossible. To keep himself up, he exceeded even his usual excess in coffee, and
about the middle of May he became very ill. On May 30 the priests were once more 
sent for. He was, however, in a state of half-insensibility, and petulantly 
motioned them away, dying in the course of the night. Stories about his death in
astate of terror and despair are false.

The result was a difficulty as to burial, which was compromised by hurried 
interment at the abbey of Scellihres in Champagne, anticipating the interdict of
thebishop of the diocese by an hour or two. On July 10, 1791, the body was 
transferred to the Panthion, but during the Hundred Days it was once more, it is
said, disentombed, and stowed away in a piece of waste ground. His heart, taken 
from the body when it was embalmed, and given to Madame Denis and by her to 
Madame de Villette, was preserved in a silver case, and when it was proposed (in
1864) to restore it to the other remains, the sarcophagus at Sainte-Genevieve 
(the Panthion) was opened and found to be empty.

Discussion

In person Voltaire was not engaging, even as a young man. His extraordinary 
thinness is commemorated, among other things, by the very poor but well-known 
epigram attributed to Young, and identifying him at once with "Satan, Death and 
Sin". In old age he was a mere skeleton, with a long nose and eyes of 
preternatural brilliancy peering out of his wig. He never seems to have been 
addicted to any manly sport, and took little exercise. He was sober enough (for 
his day and society) in eating and drinking generally; but drank coffee, as his 
contemporary, counterpart and enemy, Johnson, drank tea, in a hardened and 
inveterate manner.

It may be presumed with some certainty that his attentions to women were for the
most part platonic; indeed, both on the good and the bad side of him, he was all 
brain. He appears to have had no great sense of natural beauty, in which point 
he resembled his generation (though one remarkable story is told of his being 
deeply affected by Alpine scenery); and, except in his passion for the stage, he
does not seem to have cared much for any of the arts. Conversation and literature
were, again as in Johnson's case, the sole gods of his idolatry. As for his moral
character, the wholly intellectual cast of mind just referred to makes it 
difficult to judge that. His beliefs or absence of beliefs emancipated him from 
conventional scruples; and he is not a good subject for those who maintain that 
a nice morality may exist independently of religion.

He was good-natured when not crossed, generous to dependents who made themselves
usefulto him, and indefatigable in defending the cause of those who were 
oppressed by the systems with which he was at war. His peculiar fashion of 
attacking the popular beliefs of his time has also failed to secure the approval
of some who had very little sympathy with those beliefs.

Voltaire's works, and especially his private letters, constantly contain the 
word "l'infame" and the expression (in full or abbreviated) "ecrasez l'infame." 
This has been misunderstood in many ways---the mistake going so far as in some 
cases to suppose that Voltaire meant Christ by this obbrobrious expression. No 
careful and competent student of his works has ever failed to correct this gross
misapprehension. "L'infame" is not God; it is not Christ; it is not Christianity;
itis not even Catholicism. Its briefest equivalent may be given as "persecuting 
and privileged orthodoxy" in general, and, more particularly, it is the 
particular system which Voltaire saw around him, of which he had felt the 
effects in his own exiles and the confiscations of his books, and of which he 
saw the still worse effects in the hideous sufferings of Calas and La Barre.

His works

Vast and various as the work of Voltaire is, its vastness and variety are of the
essence of its writer's peculiar quality. The divisions of it have long been 
recognized, and may be treated regularly.

The first of these divisions in order, not the least in bulk, and, though not 
the first in merit, inferior to none in the amount of congenial labour spent on 
it, is the theatre. Between fifty and sixty different pieces (including a few 
which exist only in fragments or sketches) are included in his writings, and 
they cover his literary life. It is at first sight remarkable that Voltaire, 
whose comic power was undoubtedly far in excess of his tragic, should have 
written many tragedies of no small excellence in their way, but only one fair 
second-class comedy, "Nanine". His other efforts in this latter direction are 
either slight and almost insignificant in scope, or, as in the case of the 
somewhat famous "Ecossaise", deriving all their interest from being personal 
libels. His tragedies, on the other hand, are works of extraordinary merit in 
their own way. Although Voltaire had neither the perfect versification of Jean 
Racine nor the noble poetry of Corneille, he surpassed the latter certainly, and
the former in the opinion of some not incompetent judges, in playing the 
difficult and artificial game of the French tragedy. "Zaire", among those where 
love is admitted as a principal motive, and "Merope", among those where this 
motive is excluded and kept in subordination, yield to no plays of their "classe"
in such interest as is possible on the model, in stage effect and in uniform 
literary merit. Voltaire knew that the public opinion of his time reserved its 
highest prizes for a capable and successful dramatist, and he was determined to 
win these prizes. He therefore set all his wonderful cleverness to the task, 
going so far as to adopt a little even of that Romantic disobedience to the 
strict classical theory which he condemned, and no doubt sincerely, in 
Shakespeare.

As regards his poems proper, of which there are two long ones, the "Henriade", 
and the "Pucelle", besides smaller pieces, of which a bare catalogue fills 
fourteen royal octavo columns, their value is very unequal. The "Henriade" has by
wide consent been relegated to the position of a school reading book. Constructed
and written in almost slavish imitation of Virgil, employing for medium a very 
unsuitable vehicle---the Alexandrine couplet (as reformed and rendered monotonous 
for dramatic purposes)---and animated neither by enthusiasm for the subject nor by
real understanding thereof, it could not but be an unsatisfactory performance.

The "Pucelle", if morally inferior, is from a literary point of view of far more 
value, it is desultory to a degree; it is a base libel on religion and history; 
it differs from its model Lodovico Ariosto in being, not, as Ariosto is, a 
mixture of romance and burlesque, but a sometimes tedious tissue of burlesque 
pure and simple. Nevertheless, with all the" Pucelle"'s faults, it is amusing. 
The minor poems are as much above the "Pucelle" as the "Pucelle" is above 
the "Henriade".

Some conventional critics said about them that there would be "nothing, or hardly
anything, that properly deserves the name of poetry in them---no passion, no sense 
of the beauty of nature, only a narrow "criticism of life," only a conventional 
and restricted choice of language, a cramped and monotonous prosody, and none of
that indefinite suggestion which has been rightly said to be of the poetic 
essence". But there is immense wit, a wonderful command of such metre and 
language as the taste of the time allowed to the poet, occasionally a singular 
if somewhat artificial grace, and a curious felicity of diction and manner.

The third division of Voltaire's works in a rational order consists of his prose
romances or tales. These productions---incomparably the most remarkable and most 
absolutely good fruit of his genius---were usually composed as pamphlets, with a 
purpose of polemic in religion, politics, or what not. Thus "Candide" attacks 
religious and philosophical optimism, "L'Homme aux quarante ecus" certain social 
and political ways of the time," Zadig" and others the received forms of moral 
and metaphysical orthodoxy, while some are mere lampoons on the Bible, the 
unfailing source of Voltaire's wit. But (as always happens in the case of 
literary work where the form exactly suits the author's genius) the purpose in 
all the best of them disappears almost entirely.

It is in these works more than in any others that the peculiar quality of 
Voltaire---ironic style without exaggeration---appears. That he learned it partly 
from Saint-Evremond, still more from Anthony Hamilton, partly even from his own 
enemy Le Sage, is perfectly true, but he gave it perfection and completion. If 
one especial peculiarity can be singled out, it is the extreme restraint and 
simplicity of the verbal treatment. Voltaire never dwells too long on this 
point, stays to laugh at what he has said, elucidates or comments on his own 
jokes, guffaws over them or exaggerates their form. The famous "pour encourager 
les autres" (that the shooting of Byng did "encourage the others" very much is 
not to the point) is a typical example, and indeed the whole of "Candide" shows 
the style at its perfection. Voltaire has, in common with Jonathan Swift, the 
distinction of paving the way for science fiction's philosophical irony. See 
especially Micromegas.

The fourth division of Voltaire's work, the historical, is the bulkiest of all 
except his correspondence, and some parts of it are or have been among the most 
read, but it is far from being even among the best. The small treatises on 
Charles XII and Peter the Great are indeed models of clear narrative and 
ingenious if somewhat superficial grasp and arrangement. The so-called Sihcle de
Louis XVI and Siecle de Louis XV. (the latter inferior to the former but still 
valuable) contain a great miscellany of interesting matter, treated by a man of 
great acuteness and unsurpassed power of writing, who had also had access to 
much important private information. But even in these books defects are present,
whichappear much more strongly in the singular"olla podrida" entitled"Essai sur 
les moeurs", in the"Annales de Vempire" and in the minor historical works.

His work in physics concerns us less than any other here; it is, however, not 
inconsiderable in bulk, and is said by experts to give proof of aptitude.

To his own age Voltaire was pre-eminently a poet and a philosopher; the 
unkindness of succeeding ages has sometimes questioned whether he had any title 
to either name, and especially to the latter. His largest philosophical work, at
leastso called, is the curious medley entitled"Dictionnaire philosophique", 
which is compounded of the articles contributed by him to the great Encyclopidie
andof several minor pieces. No one of Voltaire's works shows his anti-religious 
or at least anti-ecclesiastical animus more strongly. The various title-words of
theseveral articles are often the merest stalking horses, under cover of which 
to shoot at the Bible or the church, the target being now and then shifted to 
the political institutions of the writer's country. his personal foes, etc., and
thewhole being largely seasoned with that acute, rather superficial, 
common-sense, but also commonplace, ethical and social criticism which the 18th 
century called philosophy. The book ranks perhaps second only to the novels as 
showing the character, literary and personal, of Voltaire; and despite its form 
it is nearly as readable.

In general criticism and miscellaneous writing Voltaire is not inferior to 
himself in any of his other functions. Almost all his more substantive works, 
whether in verse or prose, are preceded by prefaces of one sort or another, 
which are models of his own light pungent causerie; and in a vast variety of 
nondescript pamphlets and writings he shows himself a perfect journalist. In 
literary criticism pure and simple his principle work is the Commentaire sur 
Corneille, though he wrote a good deal more of the same kind?sometimes (as in 
his Life and notices of Molihre) independently sometimes as part of his Siicles.
Nowhere,perhaps, except when he is dealing with religion, are Voltaire's defects
feltmore than here. He was quite unacquainted with the history of his own 
language and literature, and more here than anywhere else he showed the 
extraordinarily limited and conventional spirit which accompanied the revolt of 
the French 18th century against limits and conventions in theological, ethical 
and political matters.

There remains only the huge division of his correspondence, which is constantly 
being augmented by fresh discoveries, and which, according to Georges Bengesco, 
has never been fully or correctly printed, even in some of the parts longest 
known. In this great mass Voltaire's personality is of course best shown, and 
perhaps his literary qualities not worst. His immense energy and versatility, 
his adroit and unhesitating flattery when he chose to flatter, his ruthless 
sarcasm when he chose to be sarcastic, his rather unscrupulous business faculty,
his more than rather unscrupulous resolve to double and twist in any fashion so 
as to escape his enemies?all these things appear throughout the whole mass of 
letters.

Most judgments of Voltaire have been unduly coloured by sympathy with or dislike
of what may be briefly called his polemical side. When sympathy and dislike are 
discarded or allowed for, he remains one of the most astonishing, if not exactly
one of the most admirable, figures of letters. That he never, as Carlyle 
complains, gave utterance to one great thought is strictly true. That his 
characteristic is for the most part an almost superhuman cleverness rather than 
positive genius is also true. But that he was merely a mocker, which Carlyle and
others have also said, is not strictly true or fair. In politics proper he seems 
indeed to have had few or no constructive ideas, and to have been entirely 
ignorant or quite reckless of the fact that his attacks were destroying a state 
of things for which as a whole he neither had nor apparently wished to have any 
substitute. In religion he protested stoutly, and no doubt sincerely, that his 
own attitude was not purely negative; but here also he seems to have failed 
altogether to distinguish between pruning and cutting down. Both here and 
elsewhere his great fault was an inveterate superficiality. But this 
superficiality was accompanied by such wonderful acuteness within a certain 
range, by such an absolutely unsurpassed literary aptitude band sense of style 
in all the lighter and some of the graver modes of literature, by such untiring 
energy and versatility in enterprise, that he has no parallel among ready 
writers anywhere. Not the most elaborate work of Voltaire is of much value for 
matter; but not the very slightest work of Voltaire is devoid of value in form. 
In literary craftsmanship, at once versatile and accomplished, he has no 
superior and scarcely a rival.

Voltaire was exiled to England 1726-1729. Voltaire greatly admired English 
religious toleration and freedom of speech, and saw these as necessary 
prerequisites for social and political progress. He saw England as a useful 
model for what he considered to be a backward France.

Voltaire perceived the French bourgeoisie to be too small and ineffective, the 
aristocracy to be parasitic and corrupt, the commoners as ignorant and 
superstitious, and the church as a static force only useful as a counterbalance 
since its "religious tax", or the tithe, helped to cement a powerbase against the
monarchy. Voltaire distrusted democracy, which he saw as propagating the idiocy 
of the masses. To Voltaire only an enlightened monarch, advised by philosophers
like himself, could bring about change as it was in the king's rational 
interest to improve the power and wealth of France in the world. Voltaire is 
quoted as saying that he "would rather obey one lion, than 200 rats of (his own) 
species". Voltaire essentially believed monarchy to be the key to progress and 
change.

He is best known in this day and age for his novel, "Candide" ("ou de 
l'Optimisme"), (1759) which satirizes the philosophy of Gottfried Leibniz. 
"Candide" was subject to censorship and Voltaire did not openly claim it as his
own work.

Voltaire is also known for many memorable aphorisms, like "Si Dieu n'existait 
pas, il faudrait l'inventer" ("If God did not exist, it would be necessary to 
invent him"), contained in a verse epistle from 1768, addressed to the anonymous
author of a controversial work, "The Three Impostors".

Jean-Jacques Rousseau sent a copy of his "Ode to Posterity" to Voltaire. Voltaire
readit through and said,"I do not think this poem will reach its destination."

Voltaire returned to a hero's welcome in Paris at age 83 in time to see his last
play produced. The excitement of the trip was too much for him and he died in 
Paris. Because of his criticism of the church Voltaire was denied burial in 
church ground. He was finally buried at an abbey in Champagne. In 1791 his 
remains were moved to a resting place at The Panthion in Paris.

The town of Ferney (Switzerland) where he lived his last 20 years of life, is now
named Ferney-Voltaire. His "Chbteau" is now a museum ("L'Auberge de l'Europe").

Quotes

"Since 1746, I have been under the greatest obligations to you. Before 
that period I read nothing but romances... I have... no desire for books less 
well written than yours." (Catherine II to Voltaire--"Spielvogel").

"I disapprove of what you say, but I will defend to the death your right to say it"
is commonly attributed to Voltaire, but was written instead by his biographer, 
Evelyn Beatrice Hall, writing under the pseudonym S.G. Tallentyre, in her 
biography "The Friends of Voltaire" (1906).[edit]
</TEXT>
