<TITLE>Phreaking</TITLE>
<TOPIC>Phreaking</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>security</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>computer security</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>computer</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>computers</TOPIC>
<TEXT>
"Phreaking" is a slang term for the action of making a telephone system do 
something that it normally should not allow. It is an illegal activity (the 
illegal act being the theft of telephone service), but one formerly pursued by a
large number of computer and electronics hobbyists out of curiosity. Other 
reasons why many people attempted (or succeeded in) phone phreaking during the 
1960s and 1970s included the (then) very high cost of long-distance telephone 
service, and a desire to rebel against the AT&T telephone monopoly.

A phreak or phreaker is a person who engages in the act of manipulating phones 
in this way. The tools of the phone phreak are electronic devices known 
as "boxes", originally the blue box, but later the black box, red box, beige box 
and clear box, etc.

Most of the techniques formerly used in phreaking are no longer effective due to
changes in the telephone system. Some of these changes were evolutionary, and 
some were designed specifically to disallow such access. Moreover, the cost of 
telephone calls has diminished to the point where few would find it worthwhile 
to engage in toll fraud; and there are numerous competing providers of telephone
service (except for most wired local service which remains controlled by regional
Bell operating companies--remnants of the former AT&T monopoly).

The crossbar system

In the 1960s the US phone system used a mechanical device for call switching 
known as the crossbar. The crossbar system could control phone switching by 
watching the voltage on the lines connected to the user's phones. When the user 
picked up the handset, the voltage dropped from about 48 V to about 10 V, so the
crossbar knew that person wanted to place a call. It would then play a dial tone 
and wait for the user to dial. It could also tell when the user had hung up when
it saw the voltage increase back to about 48 V again. When a call was received, 
the crossbar would switch to an intermittent ring voltage of about 90 VAC at 20 
Hz to make the hammer repeatedly strike the bell inside the phone and cause the 
phone to ring.

Dialing worked in a similar fashion; the mechanical, spring-loaded rotary dial 
found on older telephones functioned by quickly connecting and disconnecting the
line. At the phone company central office, the lines were connected to a series 
of mechanical disks (stepping relays) that rotated one position for every 
"click", so seven such clicks would turn the disk seven positions. After dialing
several numbers in this way (typically seven in North America), the line would
eventually be connected to another phone, which would start ringing. Anyone, with
some practice, may to this day dial a telephone by repeatedly clicking the 
receiver, one click for a "1", two clicks in rapid succession for a "2", ten 
clicks in rapid succession for a "zero".

Switching through the use of electromechanical stepping relays only worked 
for "local" calls, telephones connected to the same central office shared a 
common crossbar. Long-distance calls, however, required a method of switching 
telephone calls that did not require a physical electrical connection.

Between central offices, long lines were employed which at first required the 
intervention of a human operator. In order to reduce or eliminate the need for 
operator assistance, AT&T began a system of "direct distance dialing" which 
relied on the use of area codes, special three-digit prefixes containing 
either "1" or"0" as the second digit.

No local telephone number could begin with any of the three-digit area codes, so
they could be distinguished from long-distance calls. When detecting an area 
code, the line was switched to an outbound long line. Dialing a long distance 
became similar to dialing locally, with the exception that you are first 
switched to a remote central office who will handle the rest of the dialing. For
instance if you dial 416-555-1212 the local central office switch will 
immediately forward your call to the 416 switch in Toronto over a long line, and
fromthere the rest of the numbers will dial a Toronto call as if you were local.

Dialing pulses will not travel over long distances, which will filter them out 
due to capacitance. During the 1960s, an increasing number of calls were being 
carried by microwave links and even satellite relays, in which case there was 
no electrical connection between the two end offices at all. In order to allow 
the dialing signals to travel between offices then, AT&T devised a device that 
translated the pulses into tones, which is, after all, what the phone system is 
built to handle. At the far end office another similar device translates the 
tones back into pulses, dialing the existing switch. These tones, known as 
multi-frequency, included not only numbers, but various commands for signaling 
things like hanging up the call.

In the 1970s, the area code system was augmented by requiring callers to dial "1"
before the area code. This enabled all the former area codes to be used as local 
exchange prefixes, and enabled any three-digit combination to be used as an area
code. The prefix "011" was later implemented to permit overseas calls to be dialed
without operator assistance in a similar fashion (though in some areas, for a 
time the code 011 would simply reach an overseas operator).

The origins of phreaking<LINK>security:pages/security/Phreaking</LINK>

The precise origin of phone phreaking is disputed.

In one account, one day a blind student was playing with the phones in his local
university when he whistled into it, and the phone suddenly hung up. After some 
experimentation and a few calls to local technicians, he learned that he had 
stumbled across the "user had hung up" tone, 2600 Hz. When the system heard it, 
it hung up the phone, thinking the call was ended.

Some time later the soon-to-be famous phreak John Draper, alias Captain Crunch, 
learned of the technique from a local group of blind phreaks. He was an 
electronics hobbyist, which is why they had learned of him, and soon constructed
what would later be known as a blue box, which generated the 2600Hz tone. He 
later discovered that a toy whistle in boxes of Cap'n Crunch cereal also 
produced the same tone. Just as one may still dial a telephone by repeatedly 
clicking the receiver, Draper discovered that one could dial using a series of 
rapidly pulsed 2600 Hz tones on a Cap'n Crunch whistle.

In 1971, some hippies discovered the possibility of making free calls. A 
militant faction of the hippie movement, known as "yippies", started a magazine 
called Youth International Party Line (the name both referred to the political 
nature of the movement and to its obvious telephonic emphasis). The paper's 
mission was to teach methods of telephone fraud. Yippies considered themselves a
type of tough hippies willing to use violence and terrorism to obliterate (as 
far as possible) American society. As opposed to classical anarchists, they were
not opposed to technology; rather, they exploited all knowledge and resources 
available to them. One of the most frightening aspects of the yippie movement 
was that many of its members were quite intelligent. Prominent yippie "leaders" 
were Abbie Hoffman and Jerry Rubin.

In 1973, a faction of technology fanatics broke away from the yippie movement 
and formed an expressly anti-social and anarchistic organization around the YIPL
paper (now known as TAP, or Technical Assistance Program). Within a short period 
of time, there was a global network of phreakers. The basic philosophy of the 
paper was still the same as that of the Youth International Party.

Scanning also existed, and was indeed quite prominent, at this time. Control 
codes and test lines were far more easy to find, and included numbers like 
11211. These codes can no longer be dialed, as most telephone systems will 
process them as long distance (1-121-1...) or star commands (1121= 21).

2600 Hz

2600 Hz, the key to early phreaking, was a signal sent to the long-distance 
switch to indicate that the user had hung up the phone. At that point the call 
was not completely disconnected. Although the long-distance hardware thought the
call was disconnected, the local user was still physically connected to their 
local crossbar---it knew that the user was still connected because the voltage 
never dropped. This left the system in an inconsistent state. The dialer was 
still connected to a long-distance trunk line and switch at the remote switching
centerthat was perfectly willing to complete or further route calls.

A number of people in the 1960s discovered a loophole that resulted from this 
combination of features. The trick was to call a toll free number or 
long-distance directory number and then play the 2600 Hz tone into the line 
before the call was answered on the other side of the line. Then they simply 
dialed the number they actually wanted on a blue box, and the remote crossbar 
happily connected them for free. Of course when they were connected to the 
diverted call their local central office would be alert and the technicians 
began searching for inordinately long directory calls or excessive dialing to 
particular toll free numbers. Many phone phreaks were forced to use pay 
telephones as the telephone company technicians regularly tracked long-distance 
toll free calls in an elaborate cat-and-mouse game.

As the knowledge spread, the growing number of phone phreaks became a minor 
culture onto their own. They were able to train their ears to determine how the 
long lines routed their calls. Sympathetic (or easily social-engineered) 
<LINK>security:pages/security/Social_engineering_computer_security</LINK>
telephone company employees gave them the various routing codes to use
international satellites and various trunk lines like expert operators. The phone
companies quickly caught on to the scheme and slowly deployed a number of systems
to defeat it, but the phreaks felt that a true solution would be impossible
because it would require adding hardware (a filter) to every line on every
crossbar in the world. Unless the phone company replaced all their hardware,
phreaking would be impossible to stop. AT&T instead turned to "the law" for help,
and a number of the more famous phreaks were caught by the FBI.

Eventually, the phone companies in North America did, in fact, replace all their
hardware. They didn't do it to stop the phreakers, but simply as a matter of 
course as they moved to fully digital switching systems. Unlike the crossbar, 
where the switching signals were carried on the same lines, the new systems used
separate lines for signalling that the phreakers couldn't get to. This system is 
known as Common Channel Interoffice Signaling.

One box, two box, red box, blue box

Many phreaking techniques can be implemented with small electronic circuits, 
easily made by hobbyists once the secret of their operation is known. The first 
circuit to generate the switching tones needed to reroute long-distance calls 
was nicknamed the blue box by an early phreak who had built one in a blue 
enclosure. Soon, other types of phreaking circuits were given similar names.

At one point, pay telephones used specific tones (separate from the MF tones 
used for numbers) to signal the deposit of a coin. These tones, then used only 
for long distance and overseas calling, would signal the amount deposited to a 
tolling computer called ACTS. Phreaks learned the frequencies used and produced 
circuits to spoof them. Such a device became known as a red box. Though it was 
also possible to call one pay phone from another and then simply record the 
sounds as coins were deposited in the first pay telephone. The phreaked call was
then completed and when the operator asked for payment the phreak would play 
back the recording of the sounds (including the physical sound of the coins 
being deposited into the coin box) into the mouthpiece of the telephone for the 
benefit of the operator. To combat this, telephone companies used myriad devices
local to the payphone, including a muted handset. Red-boxing (the act of using 
red boxes) ceased to work in most areas in the 1980s when the phone companies 
installed a sensor that actually detected the coin falling into the box. Finally
they moved this signaling out of band completely. However, in some areas where 
telephone equipment was not upgraded until later, it remained effective into the
1990s. Dozens of other types of "boxes" were invented. In the BBS scene of the 
late 1980s and early 1990s, crude ASCII art diagrams of phreaking box schematics
circulated on bulletin board systems. Many of these designs simply cloned 
particular telephone features not usually accessible on residential phones, such
as a hold button or the letter keys used in Autovon (the silver box). Many were 
useless, some were faulty, and some were pure hoaxes: for instance, a "blotto 
box" which supposedly could take out an area code with a huge electrical 
charge.

Modern day phreaking

To some extent, phreaking continues to the modern-day. Because the point for 
many was not simply to gain free long-distance access but to learn how the 
systems worked, the telephone companies have not been able to completely kill 
the art. Modern-day phreaking activities are mostly comprised of scanning, or 
using the DTMF tones to dial various numbers looking for tests. Others include 
hacking the new digitally-controlled payphones, which have a number of control 
codes, and manipulating the various test numbers. Some phreaks also try to "scan"
for tones used as control codes on systems, or manipulate operators into doing 
things they should not. A small number of people also go about opening utility 
boxes (located on the ground, in people's lawns) and plugging telephones into 
them, however this is extremely illegal and it is very easy to get caught.

The various tests that are exploited by phreakers today are partially listed 
below:

Alberta Termination Test Line 
Quiet Termination 
Loop line 
Ringback 
ANAC 
 
Features of interest to phreakers are partially listed below:

ANI 
CNA 

Famous phone phreaks

John Draper 
Joybubbles 
Evan Doorbell 
</TEXT>
