<TITLE>Babylon 5</TITLE>
<TOPIC>Babylon 5</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>science fiction</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>American science fiction</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>television</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>television series</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>film</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>novel</TOPIC>
<TEXT>
Babylon 5 is an epic science fiction television series created by, produced, and
largel ywritten by J. Michael Straczynski. Its music was composed by Christopher 
Franke. The pilot movie, "The Gathering," aired on February 22, 1993, and the 
regular series initially aired from January 26, 1994 through November 25, 1998. 
Because of the unusual rapidity with which the series was aired in the United 
Kingdom on Channel 4, the last four or five episodes of the early seasons aired 
in the UK before the US.

The series won several awards[1], including two Hugos for Best Dramatic 
Presentation. One of the Hugo awards is used as a prop in the final episode, 
marking the first time that a Hugo has been shown on-screen in a series which won
a Hugo.

Warning: Plot details follow.

The series, often held as a good example of space opera, consists of a five year
story arc taking place over five seasons of 22 episodes each. The hub of the 
story is a large space station named "Babylon 5;" the five mile long, 2.5 million
ton rotating colony is built to be a gathering place for fostering peace through
diplomacy, trade and cooperation. In the words of its commander, it is humanity's
"last, best hope for peace." However, Babylon 5 is the center of political 
intrigue and conflict, and eventually becomes a pawn in a massive interstellar
conflict from which it emerges with a Pyrrhic victory over forces of darkness 
and chaos.

Having long been a science fiction fan himself, Straczynski was determined to 
produce a science fiction series where, for once, things would be done properly:
consistent technology, "no kids or cute robots", no new "particle of the week" to 
tie up a plot. To this end he hired Harlan Ellison as a consultant to the 
series. Ellison is not known for suffering fools quietly, and had seen a 
projected series of his own ("The Starlost") ruined by the studio's interference
and budget-cutting.

Unlike most television shows, this series was conceived as a novel, with a 
beginning, a middle, and an end. The overall story of the show was plotted out 
in some detail before the first episode was ever shot. Having a (loosely) 
predetermined plot was advantageous in many respects, as longer-term planning 
greatly reduced the working budget required on sets and costumes. The planned 
plot arc, allowing largely fixed sets and economies of scale, favorably compared
with more episodic series which might require an entirely new set of props or 
costumes for each episode.

Though conceived as a whole, and with Straczynski writing most of the episodes 
(including all but one of the episodes after the second season, a feat rarely 
accomplished in television), it was necessary to adjust the plotline to 
accommodate external influences. The replacement of actor Michael O'Hare as the 
station commander after the first season, reportedly either at the insistence of
studio executives or due to different developing plot requirements, and covering 
the unexpected departure of actress Claudia Christian proved to be major 
challenges. Star Trek veterans Walter Koenig (Chekov), and Majel Barrett 
(Christine Chapel, Lwaxana Troi, and the Computer Voice) have both had guest 
roles during the course of the series.

Renewal of the show after each season was never assured, and cancellation after 
the fourth season was almost certain. This resulted in a hasty consolidation of 
the end of the Shadow War and subsequent events, as the latter half of the 
fourth season was modified to incorporate remaining elements of the planned 
story arc so as not to end the series unresolved. A series finale episode 
("Sleeping in Light") was set twenty years in the future so that it could run 
either at the end of the fourth season or, if the series was renewed, at the end
of the fifth season. At the very last moment the series was picked up for a fifth
season on a different US television network (TNT); a new fourth-season finale 
episode was filmed, and "Sleeping in Light" was held until the end of the fifth 
season. However, since the fourth season had already wrapped up most of the 
major story arcs, fans generally regard the fifth season as not having as much 
to cover and being fairly weak.

Regular Cast

Jeffrey Sinclair (Michael O'Hare, season 1) 
John Sheridan (Bruce Boxleitner, seasons 2-5) 
Susan Ivanova (Claudia Christian, seasons 1-4) 
Michael Garibaldi (Jerry Doyle) 
Delenn (Mira Furlan) 
Londo Mollari (Peter Jurasik) 
G'Kar (Andreas Katsulas) 
Dr. Stephen Franklin (Richard Biggs) 
Vir Cotto (Stephen Furst) 
Lennier (Bill Mumy) 
Na'Toth (Caitlin Brown, season 1; Mary Kay Adams, season 2) 
Warren Keffer  (Robert Rusler, season 2) 
Elizabeth Lochley (Tracy Scoggins, season 5) 
Zack Allan (Jeff Conaway, seasons 3-5) 
Lyta Alexander (Patricia Tallman, seasons 4-5)
Talia Winters (Andrea Thompson, seasons 1-2) 
Marcus Cole, (Jason Carter, seasons 3-4)

Recurring Guest Characters

Alfred Bester (Walter Koenig) 
Morden (Ed Wasser) 
David Corwin  (Joshua Cox) 
Lord Refa (William Forward) 
Neroon (John Vickery) 
Ta'Lon (Marshall Teague) 
Emperor Cartagia (Wortham Krimmer) 
Kosh (voiced by Ardwight Chamberlain)

The station

Babylon 5 is the fifth of the Babylon stations. Its predecessors Babylon, 
Babylon 2, and Babylon 3 were all sabotaged and destroyed before their 
completion. Babylon 4 was completed and went operational, but twenty-four hours 
later it disappeared without a trace.

Civilizations

One of the show's many themes is the cultural and social interaction between 
civilizations: the station is after all a diplomatic meeting-place. The show is 
as much political thriller as science fiction.

There are five dominant civilizations represented on Babylon 5, and a more than 
a dozen less-powerful ones. Note: the interactions between civilizations causes
profound alterations through the course of the show. The descriptions given below
are applicable during the first two seasons of the show (depicting the years 
2257 through 2259).

Earth Alliance

Although humanity has expanded to Mars and Io and occupies several dozen colony 
worlds outside the solar system, the Earth Alliance is still dominated by Earth.
Since the end of the Earth-Minbari war, when Earth stood on the brink of 
annihilation, it has prospered in interstellar trade; some factions, however, 
have grown xenophobic and isolationist. Following the suspicious death of 
President Santiago and the rise to power of vice-president Clarke, the new 
President forms Nightwatch. This ominously named paramilitary secret police 
organisation is dedicated to internal security against external threats.

Increasingly powerful in the Earth milieu is the Psi Corps, a quasimilitary 
organization which both regulates and is controlled by human telepaths. Psi Cop 
Alfred Bester (Walter Koenig) is the face of the Corps commonly presented to 
viewers. Straczynski named him after science fiction author Alfred Bester, the 
Psi Corps being loosely based on elements of Bester's novel "The Demolished Man".
The station is staffed by the Earth Alliance military, Earthforce; the station's 
commander (first Commander Jeffrey Sinclair, then Captain John Sheridan, and 
finally Captain Elizabeth Lochley) also serves as Earth's ambassador. Commander 
Susan Ivanova is second in command, Michael Garibaldi is security chief, and Dr.
StevenFranklin is chief medical officer.

Minbari Federation

Already ancient when humanity was young, the Minbari Federation is a caste 
society, its people divided into workers, warriors, and priests. The Minbari are
led by the Grey Council, which contains nine representatives, three from each of 
the three castes. This arrangement was founded by Valen, the legendary prophet 
from ancient Minbari history, whom the Minbari revere above all.

Due to an unfortunate misunderstanding during first contact with humans, the 
Minbari declared war on the Earth Alliance and quickly overwhelmed the Earth 
Alliance fleet, beating them back to within sight of Earth and within moments of
totalvictory, when abruptly the Minbari ceased their offensive and surrendered. 
The reasons for this play an important role in the plot of the series.

Minbari are humanoid, usually thin and pale; they are bald, with gray bony 
crests across the back of their heads. The Minbari ambassador to Babylon 5 is 
Delenn, a female Minbari of the religious caste and member of the Grey Council.

Centauri Republic

The Centauri Republic is an empire which has grown decadent and is in a slow 
decline. The Centauri, a humanoid race, are a proud and aristocratic people who 
have seen better days; the Emperor and his scheming nobles leap at any chance to
regain the glories of yesteryear. Centauri males run toward obesity; females are 
traditionally bald, while males wear their hair in fanlike crests, the height of
which is determined by the male's rank in society. The Centauri ambassador is 
Londo Mollari, a minor noble considered past his prime, and his assistant is the
bumbling Vir Cotto.

Narn Regime

Another "young race" like humanity, the Narn Regime were previously occupied and 
enslaved by the Centauri, and bear them deep ill-will because of the brutal 
methods of control employed. Narns are widely perceived to be primitive and 
barbaric, a stereotype the Centauri engendered during their occupation. This 
perception continues due to Narn fears about Centauri aggression, and increasing
calls for retribution against their former masters.

The Narn are led by the Kha'Ri council. Their religion venerates philosopher 
prophets, and most Narn draw strength from various different holy writings. 
Narns are tall and have a stocky build; they are bald, with a yellowish 
complexion, mottled with brown and/or green spots. Although they look 
lizard-like, they are in fact marsupials. The Narn ambassador to Babylon 5 is 
G'Kar.

Vorlons

Little is known about the Vorlons, except that they are very advanced and 
secretive to the point of paranoia; only a handful non-Vorlons who have entered 
their space have returned to tell about it. Vorlons seem to cultivate an air of 
mystery, concealing themselves in bulky "encounter suits" during their rare 
communication with other races, and speaking via voice synthesisers in short 
enigmatic comments that suggest they know far more than they let on. The 
encounter suit and the poisonous atmosphere maintained in the Vorlon 
ambassador's quarters suggest that the Vorlons cannot live in the type of 
environment the other major races consider normal, but these could simply be 
more ways in which the Vorlons protect their secrets. Kosh Naranek is B5's 
resident Vorlon ambassador.

Only two non-Vorlons have ever gone into Vorlon Space and returned. The first is
Lyta Alexander, the telepath assistant to both Ambassador Kosh and the second 
Ambassador Kosh. After being touched by the Vorlons, she travelled to the 
borders of Vorlon Space to find them again; when she was almost dead, she was 
picked up by Ambassador Kosh and taken to the Vorlon homeworld, from which she 
returned alive as the assistant to both of the Vorlon Ambassadors. The second is
Sebastian, formerly known as Jack the Ripper.

League of Non-Aligned Worlds

In addition to the five major powers, The League of Non-Aligned Worlds consists 
of other minor powers including the Gaim, Abbai, Brakiri, Pak'ma'ra, Markab, 
Drazi, and Vree.

Shadows

There are increasing reports of a black, spidery ship being encountered in 
hyperspace, which instills a dark fear in all who look upon it. Meanwhile, the 
ancient writings of the Narn philosopher G'Quan tell of a great enemy that rose 
to power a thousand years in the past. Known as the Shadows, they spread from 
their homeworld, Z'ha'dum, to rival the stars themselves: "And the Spirit of 
Darkness moved upon the land. It screamed in the dreams of the Mindwalkers; and 
they fell, destroyed by it to their children and their children's children. Then
didthe Darkness come to Narn until it was driven out by G'Quan and the last of 
the surviving Mindwalkers."

The text is accompanied by pictures of the black ship, and ends on a chilling 
note: "There is a darkness greater than the one we fight. It is the darkness of 
the soul that has lost its way. Greater than the death of flesh is the death of 
hope, the death of dreams. Against this foe we can never surrender."

First Ones

The First Ones are a loose collection of ancient beings of which little is seen 
and less is known.

Real Life Themes

In addition to having an ongoing story arc, Babylon 5 found ways to science-
fictionalize very real life themes and address social issues relevant to modern
times.

Authoritarianism vs. anarchy; Light vs. Dark vs. Gray

The central theme in Babylon 5 is the conflict between order and chaos, and the 
people caught between.

The Vorlons and the Earth Alliance Government both represent oppressive, 
authoritarian philosophies: you will do what we tell you to, because we tell you
todo it. "Who are you?" Are you willing to sacrifice yourself for a greater 
cause, or are you merely serving your own petty interests?

Other groups, encouraged by the invisible Shadows, choose to serve their own 
glory or profit. Serial murderers and terrorists wreak havoc. "What do you want?"
Money, territory, fame, power?

The Rangers, composed mainly of Minbari and Humans with a scattering of other 
races, represent a third way; their unwavering commitment to compassion and 
self-sacrifice, epitomised by the character of Marcus Cole, opposes both the 
emotionless war of the Vorlons and the chaotic brutality of the Shadows.

Ultimately, the main characters strike a balance: sometimes selfish, sometime 
self sacrificing, making many mistakes along the way. Sometimes they impress us,
andsometimes they horrify us. "Do you have anything worth living for?" Do you 
love? Do you have a true calling?

Bigotry and forgiveness 
 
Babylon 5 can be divided into several major armed conflicts:

The war between the Humans and the Minbari, which takes place before the series 
starts. The second war between the Narn and Centauri, which takes place during 
the series. (The first occurred long before the series.) The eons-old conflict 
between the Vorlons and the Shadows. The civil war between the Minbari religious
caste and warrior caste. The civil war between President Clark's corrupt Earthgov
andthe Babylon 5-led resistance. The war between the new Interstellar Alliance 
and the Centauri republic. The coming conflict between telepathic Humans and 
mundanes (non-telepathic Humans), the major part of which takes place shortly 
after the series.

The naive viewer might see Babylon 5 as a television show about space ships 
blowing each other up. In fact, most of the above conflicts end when the side 
with superior firepower gives in to the side with the superior understanding. 
Every conflict has a forgotten "third side," people squished beneath the feet of 
the powerful. Usually a single individual willing to sacrifice himself is more 
powerful than the greatest army, while an individual willing to sacrifice 
everyone else to serve his own objectives can turn worlds into ashes, yet still 
be defeated.

After all is done, we find members of the opposing sides working together to 
forge a new future. (Examples: the Rangers, Delenn and Neroon, Delenn and 
Sheridan, Londo and G'Kar, Garibaldi and Lochley.)

Ultimately, every violent conflict is born out of self interest, perpetuated by 
prejudice and ideology, and resolved by the realization that each side needs the
otherto survive. Hatred is associated with stupidity, forgiveness is associated 
with pragmatism, and wisdom follows conflict.

Love and true seekers

Unrequited love may be the source of all pain in Babylon 5. Ivanova loses 
everyone she loves. Lennier is the ultimate victim of unrequited love, but also 
of his own foolishness. Sheridan and Delenn know true love; Sheridan comes back 
from the dead for love. Marcus says, "Sometimes love is funny, sometimes very 
sad." Garibaldi has trouble figuring it out. Vir knows what true love is from 
the beginning; his problem is getting to "number six."

But there are a few who have forsaken physical desire for a greater calling: 
finding the holy grail, all the names of God, or fulfilling a thousand year old 
prophecy.

The only alternative to having love or a true calling is to be insane, addicted 
to some petty need, a tool for some other power, or to be adrift among the 
stars. Although it must be said: most everyone in love or walking a true path is
insane. Straczynski's recurring message is to always accept passion when it 
calls.

Addiction 
 
Power can be addiction. Work is an addiction. Violence is an addiction. Two of 
the major characters are alcoholics, but "dust" and "stims" are also prominent 
drugs.

The episodes

"The Gathering," the pilot movie 

Each season shared its name with an episode which was central to that season's plot.

Season One:"Signs and Portents" 
Season Two:"The Coming of Shadows" 
Season Three:"Point of No Return" 
Season Four:"No Surrender, No Retreat" 
Season Five:"Wheel of Fire"

Other made-for-TV movies

In the Beginning
Thirdspace
The River of Souls
A Call to Arms

Spin-off series

Crusade

The spin-off series "Crusade" ran on TNT for thirteen episodes, having been set 
up by the TV-movie "A Call to Arms". The production team received help from 
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory to make sure that the series depicted science 
and technology accurately (JPL press release). But creative differences between
Straczynski and TNT caused problems; the network wanted more sex and violence 
and forced Straczynski to begin the first episode with a fistfight. The sex-and-
violence request was later withdrawn and TNT in fact allocated more money to 
Crusade, giving the actors better uniforms and new sets mid-season, but due to 
the creative differences TNT eventually decided to cancel the series after 
thirteen episodes had been produced. No major story arcs had yet come into play.

Legend of the Rangers

A made-for-TV movie titled "To Live and Die in Starlight" aired on the Sci Fi 
Channel in January 2001. It was the proposed pilot episode of a new series 
titled "Babylon 5: The Legend of the Rangers", but the pilot's poor ratings 
killed the network's interest in a series. Due to the events of September 11th, 
2001, the air date of the move had been pushed back, and it eventually was aired
opposite a vital NFL football game. JMS posted the following to USENET on January
27,2002: "The east coast ratings got hammered by the football game, which was the
highest rated such game in something like 5 years. The B5 male demos are pretty 
much the same as for sports, and we lost heavily to football. So there we did 
not do well. By contrast, on the west coast, where the show aired after the game
had finished, we not only met but exceeded SFC's expectations, getting a 3.2 or 
3.6 in many markets, which is actually pretty unheard of for a basic cable 
network. The problem is that the average, 1.7, is still what's used for 
advertising."

Novels and Novelizations

The Babylon 5 novels and novelizations are based on summaries written by the 
producer of the series J. Michael Straczynski. The three trilogies are 
considered by fans to be the greatest of the lot.

Novels
"Babylon 5: Voices" (1995) ISBN 0440220572 
"Babylon 5: Accusations" (1995) ISBN 0440220580
"Babylon 5: Blood Oath" (1995) ISBN 0440220599
"Babylon 5: Clark's Law" (1996) ISBN 044022229X
"Babylon 5: The Touch of Your Shadow, the Whisper of Your Name"(1996) 
    ISBN 0440222303
"Babylon 5: Betrayals" (1996) ISBN 0440222346
"Babylon 5: The Shadow Within"(1997) ISBN 0440223482
    (2002 edition: ISBN 0345452186)
"Babylon 5: Personal Agendas"(1997) ISBN 0440223512
"Babylon 5: To Dream in the City of Sorrows"(1997) ISBN 0440223547
     (2003 edition: ISBN0345452194)
The Psi Corps Trilogy
    "Babylon 5: Dark Genesis- The Birth of the Psi Corps"(1998) ISBN0345427157
    "Babylon 5: Deadly Relations- Bester Ascendant"(1999) ISBN 0345427165
    "Babylon 5: Final Reckoning- The Fate of Bester"(1999) ISBN 0345427173
The Centauri Trilogy
    "Babylon 5: Legions of Fire- The Long Night of Centauri Prime"(1999) 
        ISBN 0345427181
    "Babylon 5: Legions of Fire- Armies of Light and Dark"(2000) ISBN 034542719X
    "Babylon 5: Legions of Fire- Out of the Darkness"(2000) ISBN 0345427203
The Technomage Trilogy
    "Babylon 5: The Passing of the Techno-Mages- Casting Shadows"(2001) 
        ISBN 0345427211
    "Babylon 5: The Passing of the Techno-Mages- Summoning Light"(2001) 
        ISBN 034542722X
    "Babylon 5: The Passing of the Techno-Mages- Invoking Darkness"(2001) 
        ISBN 0345438337



Novelizations
"Babylon 5: In the Beginning"(1998) ISBN 0345424522
"Babylon 5: Thirdspace" (1998) ISBN 0345424549
"Babylon 5: A Call to Arms"(1999) ISBN 0345431553

Video game

In 1998 a video game based on Babylon 5, named "Into the Fire," was being created
by Sierra. This game was to have cast the player as the pilot of a Starfury 
fighter craft through many missions of a dynamic storyline, while also giving 
the player an opportunity to"move up through the ranks" and eventually have 
command of capital ships and even fleets. It was to feature large battles and 
realistic physics. Multiplayer competitive and cooperative modes would have 
allowed players to pilot ships of alien races. Christopher Franke composed and 
recorded new music for the game, and live action footage was filmed with the 
primary actors from the series.

Work on this game ended, however, when on September 21, 1999, as part of a 
corporate reorganization, Sierra canceled it and laid off its development staff.

The web site FirstOnes.com ("http:""www.firstones.com"") followed the game's 
development and demise, and continues to track Babylon 5 mods for other games.

Current projects

A recent post by Straczynski to Usenet indicated the continuing evolution of a 
project called "The Memory of Shadows." In typically cryptic fashion, Straczynski
has not yet provided any details about the project, but included a reference to 
ratio of 2.35:1. This is the format typically used for recent feature films. The
sudden death of Richard Biggs in May 2004 delayed the project because of the 
emotional impact on everybody involved, and because the script had to be 
re-written.

Straczynski has also announced that more Babylon 5 books are on the way.
</TEXT>
