<TITLE>Blake's 7</TITLE>
<TOPIC>Blake's 7</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>science fiction</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>British science fiction</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>television</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>television series</TOPIC>
<TEXT>
"Blake's 7" was a BBC science fiction television series created by Terry Nation
which ran four seasons from January 2, 1978 to December 21, 1981.

The Series

The series was produced in the United Kingdom and aired on the BBC. It was 
similar to other BBC science fiction shows such as Doctor Who,
<LINK>sf:pages/sf/Doctor_Who</LINK> but was characterised by a darker tone and often 
defied the traditional sharply defined ethical stances associated with this type
of drama, with considerable blurring of the distinction between the "good" and 
the "bad" guys (and gals).

It stars a group of outlaw revolutionaries, led by a patriot-hero named Roj 
Blake (Gareth Thomas), who fight the fascistic interstellar Terran Federation in
the second century of the third calendar. The show was watched by 10 million 
viewers at its peak, an enormous number for a space opera.

The show is noted for its strong focus on character; Blake and his band of 
outlaws were all highly individual, distinctive, and flawed, as often at each 
others' throats and in pursuit of their own private agendas as they were facing 
down their common enemies in the Federation. It also featured a remarkable 
attrition rate among its main characters, in violation of accepted practice for 
a drama of its nature.

One notorious characteristic of the show was its highly effective use of 
cliffhangers at the end of each season, a feature that was used to maximum 
effect at the end of the fourth season, "Blake". This was deliberately written to
be open-ended in case the series returned, but also to be final in case it did 
not.

Another notable and often satirised aspect of the show was the light 
construction of its sets (something it shared in common with "Doctor Who"). 
The "wobbly set syndrome" was particularly noticeable during the numerous fight 
scenes--one presumes the actors had to be very careful about avoiding colliding 
with the walls. Many exterior shots portraying the surface of other worlds took 
place in quarries; fans of the show are now able to go on a Blake's 7 quarry 
location tour of the UK.

As of 2004, there is a revival movement (led by Andrew Mark Sewell and Simon 
Moorhead) to create a new miniseries of the show, entitled "Blake's 7: Legacy". 
Series star Paul Darrow (who played Avon) was involved for a time, but this is 
no longer the case.

Plot summary

Warning: Plot details follow.

Blake begins the series being captured by the Federation, convicted on 
trumped-up charges, and sent to a remote penal colony planet called Cygnus 
Alpha. It is on the prisoner transport ship "London" that he meets his future 
crew, whom he convinces to join him in a mutiny to take over the "London". The 
mutiny fails, but before Blake and his cohorts can be executed the "London" comes
upon a mysterious unidentified starship apparently derelict from a space battle. 
After several crew members attempt to board it and are killed by the ship's 
automated defences, the "London"'s captain decides to send Blake's group over to 
see if they can defuse them or die in the attempt. They take over the mysterious
and highly advanced ship, name it the "Liberator", and set out to topple the 
Federation. At least, that is Blake's goal. His other crew members, particularly
KerrAvon, followed him with various degrees of reluctance.

By the end of the second season, Gareth Thomas (Blake) sought an exit from the 
series. His character was written out, with Blake being lost in an escape pod 
after the "Liberator" was damaged in a ferocious battle with invaders from the 
Andromeda Galaxy over the Federation's central computer complex, known as Star 
One. Jenna was also lost. Del Tarrant, a mercenary who had been posing as a 
Federation trooper, was introduced to replace Blake, although Avon clashed even 
more frequently with Tarrant than he had with Blake. Avon eventually rose in 
dominance until he became the de facto leader of the group. The shadow of Blake 
remained strong over them, however, and they searched for him sporadically 
throughout the remainder of the series. "Liberator" was destroyed at the end of 
the third season, and the group soon acquired a new ship named "Scorpio" together
witha home base on a planet called Xenon. The fight against the Federation 
continued, growing more desperate, for both sides; the Federation had been 
significantly weakened after the loss of its computer control Star One and the 
galactic war that followed, allowing Servalan, the Supreme Commander of its 
military forces, to seize power and sweep aside any remaining positive qualities
theFederation may have had. She was later deposed and forced to operate on the 
fringes of the Federation in a lesser position under the alias of "Sleer".

Finally, in a climax that ensured the show a lasting place in the history of 
television, the crew at last finds Blake working as a bounty hunter on a 
backwater planet named Gauda Prime. Thinking Blake has betrayed them due to a 
misunderstanding, Avon kills Blake (blood is shown). Then Federation troops 
overrun the remainder, shooting all (it is not explicit if they are dead or not)
except Avon, whom they surround and hold at gunpoint. Avon raises his own weapon,
then as the scene cuts to black a flurry of gunfire is heard and the end credits 
rolled.

Blake's death is shown in surprisingly graphic detail considering that the 
episode ended at around 20:10 hrs, well before the watershed for violence. The 
blood and gore was added at Gareth Thomas's insistence (it was in his contract),
in order to make sure that both the audience and potential casting directors 
would not assume that Blake was only wounded and could return.

In spite of (or perhaps because of) the cliffhanger ending, so-called "post Gauda
Prime" stories about possible resolutions are a particularly popular topic in 
Blake's 7 fan fiction. The proposed relaunch of 2004 would centre around the 
only crewmember still standing in the final shot: Avon. It would be revealed 
that Avon had not died, but was taken prisoner. The timeline of the sequel 
series would essentially coincide with ours: roughly 20 years would have passed 
in the relaunch series. During these time, Avon had been left to rot in prison 
for twenty years, forgotten and to the outside world almost a myth, because most
believed he was dead. Avon's return would be a parallel to the escape from Elba 
of Napoleon.

A note on the show's name: When Terry Nation originally scripted the show, he 
intended Blake to have six companions, hence the name "Blake's 7". Due to budget 
constraints, however, Blake's crew never included more than six human actors 
(including Blake) at one time. The show subtly addressed this discrepancy by 
counting one or more computers as "members" of the crew. Thus, the original seven
were Humans: Roj Blake, Kerr Avon, Jenna Stannis, Vila Restal, Olag Gan, Cally 
(6) Computers: Zen (1)

By the end of the series, the lineup had become

Humans: Kerr Avon, Vila Restal, Del Tarrant, Dayna Mellanby, Soolin (5) 
Computers: Orac, Slave (2)

Using this system, the total does actually add up to seven with fair consistency
throughout the series. Note how this list also demonstrates the characteristic 
attrition of main characters (including Blake himself!) throughout the series:

Gan killed early in Season B (replaced in the count by Orac; thereafter never 
more than five humans at one time) 
Blake and Jenna lost at the end of Season B (replaced in the count by Dayna and 
Tarrant) 
Zen destroyed and Cally killed at the end of Season C/start of Season D (replaced
in the count by Slave and Soolin, respectively).

Also, Travis, one of the main villains of the first two seasons, is killed at 
the end of Season B. He is never replaced by a recurrent character, as Servalan,
the other main villain, henceforth has a tendency to quickly lose her sidekicks 
either by accident or by design.

Cliffhanger Season Endings (spoilers)

Season A End of season cliffhanger: A look into the future shows the "Liberator" 
apparently destroyed by a sudden explosion.

Season B End of season cliffhanger: The "Liberator" is about to engage a fleet of
enemy starships of overwhelming numerical superiority.

Season C End of season cliffhanger (intended as an end of series cliffhanger): 
The "Liberator" is destroyed, leaving its crew marooned on the planet Terminal.

Season D End of series cliffhanger (?): Blake is killed by Avon, followed in 
quick succession by the apparent deaths of "Scorpio"'s crew members with the sole
exceptionof Avon, who seems about to suffer the same fate.

Cast:

Roj Blake- Gareth Thomas 
Kerr Avon- Paul Darrow 
Jenna Stannis- Sally Knyvette
Villa Restal- Michael Keating
Olag Gan- David Jackson
Cally- Jan Chappell 
Zen ("Liberator")- Peter Tuddenham(voice) 
Orac- Peter Tuddenham (voice) 
Slave ("Scorpio")- Peter Tuddenham (voice) 
Servalan- Jacqueline Pearce
Travis- Stephen Greif/Brian Croucher
Dayna Mellanby- Josette Simon
Del Tarrant- Steven Pacey
Soolin- Glynis Barber 


Episode List:

1978 (Season A)

1. The Way Back 
2. Space Fall 
3. Cygnus Alpha 
4. Time Squad 
5. The Web 
6. Seek Locate Destroy 
7. Mission to Destiny 
8. Duel 
9. Project Avalon 
10. Breakdown 
11. Bounty
12. Deliverance 
13. Orac

1979 (Season B)

1. Redemption 
2. Shadow 
3. Weapon 
4. Horizon 
5. Pressure Point 
6. Trial 
7. Killer 
8. Hostage 
9. Countdown 
10. Voice from the Past 
11. Gambit 
12. The Keeper
13. Star One

1980 (Season C)

1. Aftermath 
2. Powerplay 
3. Volcano 
4. Dawn of the Gods 
5. The Harvest of Kairos 
6. City at the Edge of the World 
7. Children of Auron 
8. Rumours of Death
9. Sarcophagus 
10. Ultraworld 
11. Moloch 
12. Death-Watch 
13. Terminal

1981 (Season D)

1. Rescue 
2. Power 
3. Traitor 
4. Stardrive 
5. Animals 
6. Headhunter 
7. Assassin 
8. Games 
9. Sand 
10. Gold 
11. Orbit 
12. Warlord 
13. Blake
</TEXT>
