<TITLE>Doctor Who</TITLE>
<TOPIC>Doctor Who</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>science fiction</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>British science fiction</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>television</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>television series</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>film</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>novel</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>comics</TOPIC>
<TEXT>
"Doctor Who" is a British science fiction television series, concerning the 
adventures of a mysterious time travelling adventurer known only as "The 
Doctor".

Overview

The show was and remains a significant part of British popular culture, and was 
widely recognized for its creative storytelling, use of innovative music and 
special effects which were produced by the BBC Radiophonic Workshop. The show 
has also gone on to be a cult television favourite.

In the series, "The Doctor" is a Time Lord, a race from the planet Gallifrey and 
is not subject to the normal constraints of mortal life. His first incarnation 
was played by the irascible William Hartnell, later to be followed by seven 
more, with perhaps the most enduring incarnation being the fourth Doctor, played
by Tom Baker.

Origins

The programme ran for 26 seasons on the BBC from November 23, 1963 until 
December 6, 1989; it was the longest-running television science fiction series. 
It was created at the suggestion of Sydney Newman after lengthy brainstorming 
sessions that included such people as Head of Serials Donald Wilson, Alice 
Frick (whose suggestion it was to make the show about time travel), C. E. 'Bunny'
Webber, and David Whitaker.

Missing episodes

During the 1970s and 1980s, the BBC erased or incinerated a lot of material 
which it thought of no further commercial use. This happened because of 
copyright restrictions on some pieces of material, allowing them to be broadcast
a limited number of times or to be sold on within a certain period of time. Some 
pieces of film (such as coronation of Queen Elizabeth II) were seen to be of 
national importance and preserved after this deadline. Other pieces of film were
not so fortunate--when it became unfeasible to store this "redundant" material, it
was disposed of. "Doctor Who" fell into the latter category; 108 episodes of the 
television series from the Hartnell and Troughton eras do not exist in the BBC's
archives, despite their attempts to recover it.

Some success has been reported--a number of countries (notably Australia and 
Canada) bought rights to the series for broadcast abroad. Some episodes have 
been returned to the BBC from the archives of the Australian Broadcasting 
Corporation and the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. Other episodes have been 
returned by fans of the programme who had made expensive recordings off air at 
the time. Still other episodes are rumoured to have been returned by 
ex-employees of the BBC who did not wish to see a part of their childhood 
destroyed; instead of incinerating/destroying the tapes, they had hidden them at
home. 

The story

The Doctor travels in a fictional vehicle called the TARDIS ( T ime A nd R 
elative D imension I n S pace) which enables him to travel to any point in time 
and space, anywhere in the universe. For the most part, he explores the universe
at random (usually because the vessel's navigation system is old and unreliable),
using his extensive knowledge of science and advanced technology to heroically 
avert crises on various worlds. The weekly episodes would form part of a 
contained story or "serial", of between 1 and 8 episodes, but usually 6 in 
earlier years and 3-4 in later years. Three notable exceptions were "The Trial of
a Time Lord", which ran for 14 episodes and took up the whole of Season 23; the 
epic "The Daleks' Master Plan", which made it to 12 episodes (plus a 1 episode 
Doctor-less teaser entitled "Mission to the Unknown"); and the 10-episode 
serial "The War Games". The Doctor has, at various times, been accompanied by 
between 1 and 3 companions: people who choose to travel with him for a period of
time for a variety of reasons.

The programme was initially devised to be partly educational for family viewing 
on the early Saturday evening schedule. A proportion of episodes would see the 
characters travel to important periods in human history, such as the French 
Revolution, or the Roman Empire. These so-called "historical" stories were 
dropped after the first few years in favour of the more popular science-fiction 
stories.

The expanding backstory and the Doctor's name

Most of the show's mythology and backplot was developed gradually by later 
writers. Early on, nothing is known of the Doctor at all, not even his name: in 
early episodes he is referred to as "Grandfather" by the character of Susan. In 
the very first story "100,000 BC", two teachers from the Coal Hill School in 
London, Barbara Wright and Ian Chesterton, become intrigued by one of their 
students, Susan Foreman, who exhibits high intelligence and advanced knowledge. 
Trailing her to her address, a junkyard at 76 Totter's Lane, they see her enter 
what appears to be a police box. Following her in, the two discover the police 
box's unusual properties, and encounter an old man calling himself the Doctor, 
who subsequently whisks them away for an adventure in time and space.

In the episode, Barbara addresses the Doctor as "Doctor Foreman", the junkyard in
which they have found him having the name "Foreman" outside. The Time Lord 
responds "Doctor who?" Although credited as "Doctor Who" on screen, the Doctor is 
never really referred to as such, except in such a tongue-in-cheek manner. The 
only exception has been a computer in the serial, "The War Machines", which 
commanded that "Doctor Who is required".

In "The Highlanders" he adopts the alias "Doctor von Wer" (a German approximation
of "Doctor Who"), and signs himself as" Dr. W" in "The Underground Menace". When 
pressed, he sometimes gives the name "Dr John Smith". On occasion he is referred 
to as "Theta Sigma", apparently a University nickname. He has also been mocked by
his own people for adhering to such a "lowly" title as "Doctor". From Season 19, 
the credits changed to refer to the character as" The Doctor", although the 
series title remained.

In many spin-off comic strips, books, films and other media, the character is 
often called "Doctor Who" (or just "Dr Who") as a matter of course, though this 
has declined in more recent years.

The monsters

Daleks: Exterminate! Exterminate!

In many of the series stories, The Doctor has also saved the Earth (and a number 
of other planets) from such notable adversaries as the Autons, the Cybermen, the
Sontarans and the Silurians. However, the factor which probably most ensured 
that the series captured the public's attention was the introduction of the 
Daleks in the second storyline: a lethal race of metal-armoured mutants, whose 
chief role in the great scheme of things would appear to be, as they frequently 
observe in their instantly-recognisable metallic voices, to "Exterminate!".

Viewership

There was some controversy over the show being suitable for viewing by children.
Moral campaigner Mary Whitehouse made a series of complaints to the BBC in the 
1970s over its sometimes gory or scary content. However her actions gave the 
programme a certain reputation which made it even more popular, particularly 
with children.

In the 70s, the "Radio Times", a British television guide, announced that a 
child's mother had said the theme song terrified her son. Radio Times was 
apologetic, but her view is not the prevailing one. Indeed, the tune has made 
its way even to the world of mobile phone ringtunes.

Watching "Doctor Who" from a position of safety behind the sofa, peering 
cautiously out to see if the scary bit was over, used to be one of the great 
shared experiences of British childhood. This gave rise to the phrase 'Behind the
sofa' in popular culture. However others contend this was a myth, pointing out 
that the traditional positioning of a sofa did not allow for this. Regardless, 
the series has traumatised many a young child.

There is a reference to the show (that is, as a work of fiction) in the show 
itself. In the serial "Remembrance of the Daleks", set in 1963, a television 
shows a BBC Television caption of the period with a continuity announcer 
saying "This is BBC television, the time is quarter past five and Saturday 
viewing continues with an adventure in the new science fiction series "Doc"?", 
but is cut off by a scene change before completing the title.

Characters

Seven actors have played the Doctor on television in the original series:

1. William Hartnell (November 23, 1963 - October 29, 1966) 
2. Patrick Troughton (November 5, 1966 - June 21, 1969) 
3. Jon Pertwee (January 3, 1970 - June 8, 1974) 
4. Tom Baker (December 28, 1974 - March 21, 1981) 
5. Peter Davison (March 21, 1981 - March 16, 1984) 
6. Colin Baker (March 22, 1984- December 6, 1986) 
7. Sylvester McCoy (September 7, 1987 - December 6, 1989)

In 1996 there was a one-off television movie in which Sylvester McCoy's Doctor 
regenerated into:

8. Paul McGann (May 27, 1996)

On March 19, 2004, the BBC announced that there will be a new Doctor in the 2005
series,namely:

9. Christopher Eccleston.

See List of Doctor Who serials.

In the Sixth Doctor "Trial of a Time Lord" episodes, a Time Lord who went by the 
title of the Valeyard (played by Michael Jayston) was revealed to be a potential
Thirteenth Doctor, embodying all of the Doctor's potential evil and malevolence. 
The Valeyard was defeated in his attempt to actualize himself by stealing the 
Sixth Doctor's remaining regenerations, however, and so may never actually 
exist.

On a few occasions, former actors guest-starred in episodes featuring past 
incarnations of The Doctor:

Jon Pertwee and Patrick Troughton with William Hartnell in a minor role in "The 
Three Doctors", Troughton, Pertwee with Davison in"The Five Doctors", a 20th 
anniversary special, with another actor, Richard Hurndall, standing in for the 
late William Hartnell. The story began with a clip featuring Hartnell. Tom Baker
declined to appear and the narrative was reworked to use clips from "Shada", an 
intended six-episode story from the Tom Baker/Lalla Ward period that was never 
completed due to industrial action. A dummy of Tom Baker was used in the 
publicity photographs. Patrick Troughton with Colin Baker in "The Two Doctors" 
Jon Pertwee, Tom Baker and Colin Baker, Peter Davison and Sylvester McCoy 
--with rubber dummy heads standing in for William Hartnell and Patrick Troughton
-- in"Dimensions in Time", a charity spoof in aid of Children in Need.

The changing of actors is explained within the series by the Time Lords' ability
to "regenerate" after suffering mortal injury, illness, or age; the process 
repairs and rejuvenates all damage, but as a side-effect it reconfigures the 
Time Lords' physical appearance semi-randomly and also affects their 
personalities. This explanation was not developed until after the elderly 
William Hartnell had already retired from the show for health reasons. It was 
later established that each Time Lord can regenerate 12 times before permanently
dying,though as with most such "rules" there were occasionally exceptional cases,
such as when a renegade Time Lord at the end of his regeneration cycle possessed 
the body of another person to continue living.

Another Time Lord was introduced into the series during the Pertwee period, in 
the form of "The Master", an arch-villain who began to appear regularly until the
actor playing the part, Roger Delgado, was killed in a car crash in 1973. In 
1976, the character reappeared, this time played by Peter Pratt. In this 
episode, the Master was heavily disfigured, and on the verge of death due to 
using up all his regenerations. The Master appeared again in 1981, still 
disfigured, and now played by Geoffrey Beevers. This time, he absorbed a leader 
of the planet Traken, and regenerated into a new body. Anthony Ainley played 
this new Master until the series ended. In the 1996 telefilm, the Master (who has
been executed by the Daleks) appears briefly as a CGI effect (an "energy snake" 
representing his essence) until he can steal the body of a human (Eric Roberts) 
and steal the Doctor's TARDIS.

The Doctor was played in the film versions ("Dr. Who and the Daleks" in 1965 
and "Daleks- Invasion Earth 2150 AD" in 1966, both essentially retellings of 
existing stories on the big screen and with a larger budget) by the actor Peter 
Cushing. In these films, the character introduces himself as "Dr. Who", and is 
apparently human. "Doctor Who" has appeared on stage, numerous times. Almost all 
the TV stories have been novelised, and there are also a number of series of 
original novels--many of these are well-regarded and are considered to fit into 
the official Doctor Who universe. The pilot episode for a potential spinoff 
series, "K-9 and Company", was aired in 1981, but was not picked up as a regular 
series. "Doctor Who" was largely brought to an end by the actions of 
then-Director of Programmes for BBC Television, Michael Grade, who has gone on 
record as saying that he disliked science fiction. Grade pulled the series from 
its prime Saturday tea-time slot, which it had occupied for 26 years. He has 
appeared on the television series Room 101 to disparage the programme. The 
cancellation caused a furore in the British press. Grade contended that "Doctor 
Who" had become something of a joke since the release of "Star Wars" in 1977, 
which, with its far greater budget for visual effects, underscored Doctor Who's 
cheaper production values. Ironically, it was Grade who was responsible at the 
time for the show's budget, and his increasing restriction of that budget led in
part to the series' demise. Another factor was the decision to screen the show at
the same time as"Coronation Street", a long-running and highly popular British 
soap drama.

In 1996, an attempt was made to revive the series with a telemovie starring Paul
McGann as the Doctor. A co-production between the BBC and 20th Century Fox 
Television, it aired on the Fox Network on May 14, 1996, and in the UK on May 
27, 1996. The movie was simply titled "Doctor Who", but many fans refer to it 
as "Enemy Within" (suggested by the movie's executive producer, Philip Segal) to 
distinguish it from the Doctor's many other adventures.

Reaction to the telemovie was and continues to be mixed. Although British fans 
were understandably excited, and Paul McGann showed promise as the Eighth 
Doctor, many protested at the revelation that the Doctor was "half-human on his 
mother's side," as well as a kiss between the Time Lord and his companion for 
the movie, Grace Holloway. Reactions were also mixed to the big-budget redesign 
of the TARDIS set. When American ratings proved lukewarm, the projected series 
never took off. Paul McGann's Doctor, however, has enjoyed an extended career in
the audio plays and novels. The general consensus seems to be that McGann's 
characterization worked, but the movie as a whole did not.

In 1999 a four episode special called "Doctor Who and the Curse of Fatal Death" 
was made for Red Nose Day and later released on VHS. This was a parody of the 
original series. In these episodes the Doctor, played by Rowan Atkinson, meets 
both the Master, played by Jonathan Pryce, and the Daleks. During the episodes 
the Doctor is forced to regenerate several times, so he's also played by Richard
E.Grant, Jim Broadbent, Hugh Grant and Joanna Lumley. The script was written by 
Steven Moffat.

A wide selection of serials is available on VHS and DVD from BBC Video.

Spin-offs

Since the end of the television series, "official" (which is to say, 
BBC-sanctioned) "Doctor Who" has survived in a number of forms.

Novels

Billed as telling "stories too broad and deep for the small screen", Virgin 
Publishing's line of original novels featuring the Seventh Doctor began in 1991;
it was joined in 1994 by a companion series (the "Missing Adventures") 
telling "untold" stories with earlier Doctors, set between episodes of the 
television series. In the climate of renewed interest in the series that 
followed the 1996 telemovie, the BBC decided to reclaim Virgin's license when it
next came up for renewal and publish its own series of "Doctor Who" novels; the 
last two Virgin "Doctor Who" novels were released in April 1997 (bringing to an 
end almost 25 years of "Doctor Who" publishing outside of the BBC), and the first
two BBC-published novels were released in June the same year. The BBC currently 
releases two new novels every two months, one featuring the ongoing adventures 
of the Eighth Doctor and the other an "untold" story of an earlier Doctor.

Audio

Big Finish Productions makes a range of audio plays on compact disc, with one 
released every month starring one of the Fifth, Sixth, Seventh and Eighth 
Doctors. The ongoing Eighth Doctor series is independent of the novel line, with
the Doctor doing different things with a different companion. Big Finish have 
also produced a limited-run series of audio plays based around one of the 
Doctor's companions, Sarah Jane Smith, as well as a limited "Doctor Who Unbound" 
series that explore possibilities contrary to the established mythos (for 
instance, "What if the Doctor had never left Gallifrey?"); the "Unbound" series 
allows well-known actors such as Derek Jacobi and David Warner to play the 
Doctor (albeit once each). Other "Doctor Who"-related mini-series include "Dalek 
Empire" and" Dalek War", with one more on it way, and "Gallifrey", with Lalla Ward
and Louise Jameson reprising their roles as Romana and Leela.

Comics

The comic-strip adventures of the Doctor, which have appeared almost from the 
beginning of the TV series in the 1960s publication "TV Comic", and during the 
1970s in the mainly Gerry Anderson related comic "Countdown", have continued to 
be regularly featured in the pages of "Doctor Who Magazine" since its first issue
in 1979 and have outlasted the series that inspired it. The comic strip currently
features the Eighth Doctor in a series of adventures independent of the novels 
and the audios, with yet another different companion. Selected stories were 
reprinted in North America by Marvel Comics. Those that have worked on the DWM 
strip have included such notables as writer Alan Moore and artists Dave Gibbons,
Mike McMahon and John Ridgeway. Two semi-official spin-off series, "Miranda" from 
Comeuppance Comics and "Faction Paradox" from Mad Norwegian Press have also 
appeared, both featuring characters who had debuted in the BBC Novels 
series.

Novellas

Telos Publishing produced a series of original "Doctor Who" novellas, published 
individually in hardcover; the first, "Time and Relative" by Kim Newman, was 
released on November 23, 2001. Although the series was reasonably successful (in
spiteof the odd publication format, which resulted from the BBC having reserved 
for its own use the rights to publish "Doctor Who" story collections and "Doctor 
Who" books in paperback), the BBC chose not to renew Telos's license, and the 
series ended in March 2004.

Webcasts

A series of audio plays have also been webcast on the BBC's web site, beginning 
with "Death Comes to Time" in 2001."Death Comes to Time" had been made for, and 
then turned down by, BBC Radio 4.

Subsequent plays have been made specially for the webcasts by Big Finish: "Real 
Time", with the Sixth Doctor versus the Cybermen and "Scream of the Shalka", 
starring Richard E. Grant as the Ninth Doctor and Derek Jacobi as the Master. As
new "DoctorWho" producer Russell T. Davies has referred to Christopher Eccleston 
as the Ninth Doctor, it would seem that "Shalka" is not part of official 
continuity.

Video

The hunger for more "Doctor Who" on television has been partly answered by 
direct-to-video productions by various companies. The BBC has never authorised 
any "Doctor Who" video productions (presumably on the basis that one might as 
well make a new television series), but production companies have been able to 
license individual characters and alien races from the show directly from the 
writers who created them, and feature them in adventures of their own. Companies
who have released videos of this kind include Reeltime Pictures (also known for 
the long-running" Myth Makers" series of documentaries) and BBV (who have also 
released a number of "Doctor Who"-related audio adventures on the same basis). 
BBV is also known for a number of productions that, while not using any elements
fromthe show itself, tell a similar style of story and feature ex-"Doctor Who" 
stars in roles similar to those they played in the series; these include a 
direct-to-video series starring Colin Baker as "The Stranger", and a series of 
audio dramas starring Sylvester McCoy as "The Dominie".

New beginnings

On September 26, 2003 it was announced that "Doctor Who" will return to BBC One, 
written by Russell T. Davies (creator of the original "Queer as Folk"), to be 
produced by BBC Wales in 2004 for transmission in 2005. Davies will be chief 
writer and Executive Producer. Other writers for the first season are Mark 
Gatiss, Steven Moffat, Paul Cornell and Rob Shearman. The Producer will be Phil 
Collinson and the other Executive Producers will be BBC Controller of Continuing
DramaSeries Mal Young and BBC Wales Head of Drama Julie Gardner.

The new series is to be comprised of thirteen 45 minute episodes, with the first
storynamed "Rose" after the Doctor's new companion-to-be Rose Tyler, who is to be
played by former pop singer Billie Piper. The Ninth Doctor is to be played by 
Christopher Eccleston, quashing speculation that the role might go to any one of
anumber of other possible candidates. Filming of the first season begins in 
Cardiff in July 2004.

On 2 July 2004, the BBC announced that the Doctor's most famous adversaries, the
Daleks, will not be appearing in the new series. This followed the breakdown of 
negotiations with the estate of Terry Nation, who jointly hold the rights to the
characters. The BBC has confirmed that another "Doctor Who" movie is in 
development, as it has been for much of the last ten years. Details on the movie
are very sketchy and it is not even known if a script exists.

The Doctor in his fourth incarnation is frequently impersonated by Jon Culshaw 
in the "Dead Ringers" series. Culshaw's "Doctor" has telephoned two of the "real" 
Doctors--Tom Baker and McCoy--prompting the bemused McCoy to ask the immortal 
question, "Are you in the pub?".

When Culshaw phoned Baker and stated that he "was The Doctor", Tom replied, 
"There must be some mistake...I'm The Doctor..."

Scriptwriters

Other scriptwriters have included

Douglas Adams 
</TEXT>
