<TITLE>Science fiction on television</TITLE>
<TOPIC>Science fiction on television</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>science fiction</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>British science fiction on television</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>American science fiction on television</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>Australian science fiction on television</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>Japanese science fiction on television</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>British science fiction</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>American science fiction</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>Australian science fiction</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>Japanese science fiction</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>television</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>television series</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>film</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>novel</TOPIC>
<TEXT>
Science fiction is perhaps the most eclectic and certainly one of the most 
varied of all the genres of fiction. Such is its appeal that it is not 
surprising it has been a popular element of television drama since its very 
beginnings. Science fiction programmes can go anywhere, do anything, and show 
and tell stories that could not be done in other, more conventional productions.

There is some ambiguity as to what exactly "science fiction" covers in terms of 
television. In recent years, the term has come to cover any programme that deals
in the fantastical or even merely the horrific, such as "Buffy the Vampire 
Slayer", "Charmed" or "Angel". More accurately these programmes are not science 
fiction as they don't involve any real scientific element, and are perhaps more 
comfortably covered under the generic term 'telefantasy'

British television science fiction

The first known piece of television science fiction anywhere in the world was 
produced by the BBC's fledgling television service, then less than eighteen 
months old, on February 11, 1938. The piece was a thirty-five minute adaptation 
of a section of the play "R.U.R.", originally written by the Czech playwright 
Karel Capek and performed live from the BBC's Alexandra Palace studios. 
Concerning a future world in which robots rise up against their human masters, 
it was the only piece of science fiction to be produced by the BBC before the 
Corporation closed its television service down for the duration of the Second 
World War in September 1939. Sadly, the BBC had no facility for recording 
programmes in those pre-war days, so bar a few on-set publicity photographs and 
reviews in the press, all records of this production are lost.

After the resumption of the service in 1946, "R.U.R." was produced a second time,
this time a full production of the play, adapted for television by the producer 
Jan Bussell, who had also been responsible for the 1938 effort. Running to 
ninety minutes and again performed entirely live, the play went out on March 4, 
1948, and repeated again live for a second time the following day. Following 
this, the BBC did begin producing more science fiction, with further literary 
adaptations such as" The Time Machine" (1949) and children's serials 
like "Stranger from Space" (1951-52).

It was not until the summer of 1953 that adult-themed science-fiction drama 
specially written for television rather than adapted from other sources arrived 
on British television in the form of the six-part serial "The Quatermass 
Experiment", by BBC staff writer Nigel Kneale. Taking up the majority of the 
BBC's drama budget for the year and again produced live from their Alexandra 
Palace studios, the serial was a huge hit with audiences who had never been 
treated to anything of its kind before. It led to three further "Quatermass" 
serials and three feature film adaptations from Hammer, and was very much the 
basis upon which an entire generation of British television science fiction was 
established. "The Quatermass Experiment" is also the first piece of British 
television science fiction to survive in the archives, albeit only in the form 
of poor-quality telerecordings of its first two episodes, the latter four being 
lost. (There is some debate amongst historians as to whether they were ever 
telerecorded in the first place).

Kneale knew that as his serials were being transmitted live, he couldn't rely on
filmstyle special effects to tell his stories, although "Quatermass II" (1955) 
and "Quatermass and the Pit" (1958-59) were both admirably served by the 
newly-formed BBC Visual Effects Department. Instead, he based his stories around
characterisation and those characters' reactions to the strange events unfolding 
around them, using science-fiction themes to tell allegorical stories, most 
effectively parallelling real life racial tensions with the Martian 'infection' 
of "Quatermass and the Pit".

It is perhaps important to note here a crucial production difference between the
manner in which British--in particular BBC--and American television science 
fiction and indeed television in general was produced during this period. As the
BBC was based mainly around live productions right up until the early 
nineteen-sixties (the facility to telerecord programmes onto film did exist 
before the advent of commercial professional videotape, but was almost always 
used to repeat a live broadcast rather than pre-film a production) their studios
were purely electronic environments, using video cameras to transmit and later 
record dramas to videotape. This is different to the American system of 
pre-shooting television dramas and comedies directly onto film, and although the
BBC and other British broadcasters did use film for pre-shot inserts into live 
broadcasts and later for location material that couldn't be mounted in the 
studio, the majority of British TV science fiction and almost all of that 
produced by the BBC was shot on videotape well into the 1980s.

Even though the "Quatermass" serials had helped to popularise science fiction 
amongst the rapidly increasing mainstream television audience of the 1950s' 
with "Quatermass and the Pit" famously'emptying the pubs'---science-fiction 
productions were still few and far between and almost always one-offs. Popular 
serials such as "A For Andromeda" (1961) (which starred a young Julie Christie) 
would occasionally be given a sequel serial ("The Andromeda Breakthrough", 
1962), but for the most part on the BBC they would remain one-offs.

Britain's independent television network, ITV, and its constituent local 
franchise holders first began dipping their toes seriously into the waters of 
science fiction in the early nineteen-sixties. One of the driving forces behind 
their experimentation was Canadian producer Sydney Newman, who had been tempted 
over from Canada to become the Head of Drama at the ABC company (ITV franchise 
holders for the Midlands and the North at weekends and one of the providers of 
programmes for the entire network). At ABC, Newman produced the science-fiction 
serials "Pathfinders In Space"(1960) and its sequel "Pathfinders to Venus" (1961),
and span the science-fiction anthology series "Out of This World", the first of 
its kind in the UK, from the mainstream drama anthology "Armchair Theatre".

Two vitally important events for the future of the British television science 
fiction, the results of which still influence the course of the genre today, 
occurred in 1962. The first was that the BBC's Head of Light Entertainment, Eric
Maschwitz, asked Head of the Script Department Donald Wilson to have some members
of his department prepare a report on the viability of producing a new 
science-fiction series for television. The second was that Sydney Newman was 
tempted away from the ABC to take up the position of Head of Drama at the BBC, 
joining the Corporation in December.

These two events led in 1963 to the BBC developing an idea of Newman's into 
Britain's first long-running science-fiction television series, a programme that
would go on for year after year rather than simply being a one-off serial with 
perhaps a sequel or two as had previously been the pattern. Taking advantage of 
the research Wilson's department had already done, Newman initiated the creation
and along with Wilson and BBC staff writer C.E. Webber oversaw the development of
this new series, which Newman named "Doctor Who".<LINK>sf:pages/sf/Doctor_Who</LINK>

The importance of "Doctor Who" to British television science fiction cannot be 
overstated. It lasted for twenty-six seasons in its original form, has been 
revived twice and as a result is now an ongoing concern again, produced most of 
the writers who would go on to create nearly all the successful British genre 
shows up until the nineteen-eighties and influenced nearly all those working in 
the genre in British television today. It is the most popular genre series ever 
to have been screened on British television and one of the few to have become 
part of the mainstream popular consciousness, and on an international scale is 
the only series to seriously rival the longevity and cult status of the "Star 
Trek" franchise.

After much development work, the series was launched on the 23rd of November 
1963 and within the space of a few months had become much more successful than 
any of its creators ever could have imagined. Its popular success throughout the
nineteen-sixties perhaps influenced the BBC in the production of other genre 
efforts, of particular note being its own sci-fi anthology series "Out of the 
Unknown", which ran for four acclaimed seasons in the late sixties and early 
seventies.

During this time the ITV companies had been developing their production 
techniques and moving over to more American styles of production, shooting on 
glossy film rather than clunky videotape and producing a variety of action/ 
adventure series such as "The Avengers",<LINK>sf:pages/sf/The_Avengers</LINK>
"Dangerman" and "The Saint", many of which became international successes but
few of which could be really said to be actual science fiction as such. One
producer who was keen on making science fiction for the independent companies
was Gerry Anderson, who wanted to make live-action series but didn't have the
money, so used puppetry instead. His science fiction shows such as "Thunderbirds",
"Captain Scarlet" and "Stingray" became huge successes and are still well-known
to this day.

Anderson's great success in the children-aimed puppet show market eventually led
toh im being given the money to develop the live-action shows he so desperately 
wanted to make. The first of these was" UFO", which starred American actor Ed 
Bishop (Anderson often cast American actors with a view to lucrative US sales) as
the head of an undercover military organisation with responsibility for combating
aliens who came to Earth in the eponymous space craft. Although the series is 
today well respected and has impressive production values for the time, poor 
scheduling meant it was never as popular a hit as it could have been. A planned 
second season was delayed and eventually re-formatted as an entirely new show, 
entitled "Space: 1999", which ran for two seasons and was a moderate success. 
Although again impressively and expensively produced, it lacks some of the 
strong scripting and characterisation that usually underpin the most successful 
genre programmes.

The 1970s in particular can be said to have been the 'Golden Age' of British 
television science fiction. Across the board there were generally good 
production values and interesting scripts, and few sci-fi series of any great 
note were being exported from the US at the time, leaving a concentration on UK 
product. "Doctor Who" was going through its strongest period with first Jon 
Pertwee (1970-74) and later Tom Baker (1974-81) in the leading role, already 
firmly entrenched in the public consciousness but still surprising and 
entertaining.

Various former "Doctor Who" alumni had moved on to produce their own acclaimed 
genre programmes as well. The series' former scientific adviser Dr Kit Pedlar 
and former Script Editor Gerry Davis combined to create a programme 
entitled "Doomwatch", which told the story of a governmental scientific group 
formed to investigate and combat ecological and scientific threats to humankind.
Very much in the "Quatermass" tradition of allegorical storytelling (Nigel Kneale 
was indeed invited, although declined, to contribute scripts to the programme), 
it used its science-fiction basis to try and convey real warnings about the 
state of the world, as well as telling tense, dramatic stories and not being 
afraid of shocking its audience, such as in the killing off of popular lead 
character Toby Wren (played by Robert Powell).

Writer Terry Nation had been one of the formative influences on "Doctor Who"'s 
popularity, creating the legendary Dalek race for the show's second serial in 
1963, and thus assuring much of its early popularity and later longevity. For 
the rest of the 1960s Nation had concentrated on writing for ITV film series 
such as "The Baron" and "The Avengers", but in the early 1970s he returned to 
science fiction, contributing Dalek stories to "Doctor Who" again from 1973 to 
1975 and in 1975 creating his own science-fiction show, "Survivors". "Survivors" 
was a post-apocalyptic tale of a small group of people who were the only ones 
left over after an infection of some kind has wiped out most of humanity. 
Although it ran for two seasons and was generally interesting and well-received,
its impact was minimal compared to the second series that Nation conceived on his
own, a space opera entitled "Blake's 7".<LINK>sf:pages/sf/Blake's_7</LINK>

Pitched by Nation as '"The Dirty Dozen" in space', "Blake's 7" told the story of 
righteous freedom fighter Roj Blake, his battle with a corrupt Galactic 
Federation and the rag-tag group of pirates, criminals and smugglers who are 
reluctantly forced to work with him after an escape from a prison ship together.
Running for four seasons from 1978 to 1981," Blake's 7" is one of the few British 
television science-fiction series to have really engrained itself into the 
popular consciousness, and along with the likes of "Doctor Who" and "Quatermass" 
has certainly been one of the most influential. Although its production values 
were never as glossy as they could have been, the storytelling was nearly always
impressiveand the crucial point about the series was its hard-edge. The moral 
ambiguity of the leading characters made them more appealing, and as 
with "Doomwatch" it wasn't afraid of shocking the audience by killing off the 
leading characters, most famously wiping out the entire regular cast in its 
iconic final episode.

ITV was producing other science fiction in the 1970s as well as the 
aforementioned Gerry Anderson film series. Keen to garner some of the young 
audience who eagerly followed "Doctor Who", many of the ITV companies sought to 
create their own youth-orientated genre programmes, such as "Timeslip" (1970) 
and" The Tomorrow People". The latter ran for six years from 1973 to 1979, but 
although it presented some intriguing (if bizarre) storylines, it never attained
the status of"Doctor Who", possibly because unlike the BBC programme it attempted
to identify with children by starring children, thus making the cross-over appeal
to an adult audience much more difficult. It is still very fondly remembered by 
those who watched it at the time, however.

A much more respected show, produced by midlands ITV franchise holders ATV in a 
similar production style to "Doctor Who" (i.e. on videotape with various serials 
made up of between four and eight episodes of twenty-five minutes each) 
was "Sapphire and Steel". The tale of two 'time detectives' played by David 
McCallum and Joanna Lumley, "Sapphire and Steel" was a superbly atmospheric piece
of television, although its production run was often hampered by the 
unavailability of its two leads and it was brought to a premature 'if memorable'
end in 1982 when ATV were forced to transform into Central Independent 
Television.

During the 1980s, television production in general in the UK was beginning to 
change, and longer-running science-fiction series became few and far between. 
Although "Doctor Who" was still running, in terms of audience it was struggling 
to compete with US genre shows such as "Battlestar Galactica", which could be 
bought in by broadcasters for much less cost than producing their own 
programmes. Its audience figures began to crumble and it began to lose its place
at the heart of British television viewing.

Nonetheless, in the early part of the decade there were several one-off serials 
produced, albeit mainly for the BBC, ITV concentrating mostly on buying in 
American series if it wanted science fiction. Adaptations of novels such as "Day 
of the Triffids",<LINK>sf:pages/sf/Day_of_the_Triffids</LINK> "The Invisible Man"
and "Child of the Vodyanoi" (as "The Nightmare Man") were produced to great
acclaim, and the BBC began an adaptation of the "The White Mountains" novels,
under the name "The Tripods". "The Tripods" had run for two of its planned three
series in 1985 when it was cancelled by the Controller of BBC ONE, Michael Grade.
At the same time Grade attempted to cancel "Doctor Who", although the public
still had immense affection for the series even if they no longer watched it,
and the resulting outcry made him turn the cancellation into an eighteen month
suspension.

It appeared to be generally felt, at the BBC at least, that science fiction was 
more expensive to produce than other types of programme but did not return any 
higher audiences for that outlay, so it seemed uneconomical to make. Although 
there were some big popular hits around this time such as "Edge of Darkness", 
these were more mainstream dramas and thrillers with science-fiction elements 
than out-and-out genre shows. "Edge of Darkness" is important however as it was 
one of an increasing number of BBC shows to be mounted entirely on film rather 
than using any VT, a production method to which the BBC was increasingly 
switching over for everything bar soap operas and sitcoms as it was becoming 
apparent how cheap videotape made productions looked, in comparison to both 
commercial television productions and US imports.

Perhaps the very last original series of its kind in the videotape era of BBC 
science fiction was "Star Cops", which ran for only nine episodes in the summer 
of 1987 to poor viewing figures on the corporation's second channel, BBC TWO. 
Written by Chris Boucher, who had contributed three popular scripts to "Doctor 
Who" in the late 1970s and then script edited all four seasons of "Blake's 7" and
written some of that show's greatest episodes, it was a well thought-out 
programme, but poor ratings and being at the end of a tradition had doomed it 
from the start. "Doctor Who" survived until 1989, although at a much reduced 
episode count and with dwindling viewing figures in a poor slot, before the BBC 
decided to farm the series out to independent production. This process took 
seven long years and resulted in only one television movie in 1996, before 
another seven years passed and the BBC announced that it was returning as an 
expensive, high-profile in-house production. This has much to do with the fact 
that many of those in a position to write and produce the series now were fans 
of the show when they were younger and had a keen desire to see it resurrected, 
a sign of how strong the influence of the programme has been.

Perhaps the most high-profile of those behind the movement to return Doctor Who 
to the screens is writer Russell T. Davies, who initially worked in the BBC 
children's department earlier in his career, and it was here that he first 
contributed to British TV sci-fi. With very few adult sci-fi programmes being 
made, in the early 1990s children's television was one of the few places you 
would find British TV sci-fi, with other slots being filled with US imports such
as" StarTrek: The Next Generation".

Davies' first sci-fi serial was the 1991 six-parter "Dark Season", which 
co-starred a young Kate Winslet as well as former "Blake's 7" star Jacqueline 
Pearce. This was very well-received by even adult genre fans, and two years 
later Davies wrote a second, much more complex serial called "Century Falls". On 
ITV, children could see an updated version of "The Tomorrow People" (1992-94) 
made as an international co-production with companies in the US and Australia, 
and there were various other child-orientated sci-fi type series such as 
ITV's "Mike & Angelo" and the BBC's "Watt on Earth", although these lacked the 
crossover adult appeal that Davies' shows had possessed.

The interest in making British TV science fiction seemed to return to 
broadcasters towards the middle of the 1990s, perhaps fuelled by the success of 
the US imports that had helped persuade them to cut back on the genre in the 
first place, in that companies began to see the possibility of lucrative 
overseas sales and tie-in products that other genres couldn't match. In the 
mid-1990s the BBC screened four seasons of the glossy sci-fi action adventure 
series "Bugs" made by independent company Carnival. In 1998 they co-produced the 
six-part serial "Invasion: Earth" with the US Sci-Fi Channel, and even ITV began 
attempting to market British sci-fi again with serials such as "The Uninvited" 
(1997) and "The Last Train" (1999). While these shows all had their merits, they 
suffered from mostly being attempts by writers of conventional drama to'do' 
science fiction, rather than being made by out-and-out science-fiction writers 
who knew how to work the genre to its best advantage.

As of 2004, there seems to be some degree of optimism for the future of the 
genre in the UK, with good reason. Most of the highest-profile US shows have 
gently wound down and production of science fiction has become much cheaper with
therise of computer effects technology. "Doctor Who" is scheduled to return in 
early 2005, and the BBC is believed to be planning at least two other genre 
programmes, including an anthology of one-off science-fiction plays. Whether 
this proves to be a full renaissance of the genre in this country or merely a 
brief fad remains to be seen, however.[edit]

US television science fiction

Science fiction has been a popular genre on American television almost since its
inception,and the country has produced many of the best-known and most popular 
sci-fi shows in the world. Most famous of all these---indeed, perhaps the most 
famous science-fiction programme of all---is the iconic" Star Trek" and its 
spin-off shows: "Star Trek: The Animated Series", "Star Trek: The Next 
Generation", "Star Trek: Deep Space Nine", "Star Trek Voyager" and" Star Trek: 
Enterprise". Further hugely influential programmes have included the 1960s 
anthology series "The Twilight Zone" and "The Outer Limits", and other productions
such as "Battlestar Galactica", "Quantum Leap", "V", "Buck Rogers", "Babylon 
5",<LINK>sf:pages/sf/Babylon_5</LINK> "Amazing Stories", "Buck Rogers in the
25th Century", "Lost in Space", and "The Six Million Dollar Man".

The first really popular science-fiction programme on American television was 
the children's adventure serial "Captain Video and His Video Rangers", which ran 
for six years on the short-lived DuMont Network from June 1949 to April 1955. 
Broadcast live in regular half-hourly instalments, it chronicled the adventures 
of Captain Video and his sidekick The Ranger, who in the year 2254 defended the 
Earth from various threats in their space ship, The Galaxy.

Although it was not a particularly sophisticated programme by the standards of 
what was to come later, it took advantage of many then-new technologies, such as
luminance key effects to create superimposition, although it also fell back on 
various older techniques such as using stock footage from film libraries to 
cover scene breaks, and it reportedly had a new props budget of just $25 per 
episode.

Most importantly, however, it proved to be a very popular programming, at its 
peak drawing audiences of 3.5 million, which was more than respectable for 
television of that period. It fired the imaginations of many young children who 
watched it, who had never seen science-fiction outside of the cinemas before, 
and had never been able to follow the same characters in a science-fiction 
setting over such a prolonged period of time, week-in week-out.

The financial crisis of the DuMont Network eventually led to the cancellation of
Captain Video, however, and within a very short time the collapse of the entire 
network itself. However, the programme had made its mark, and other 
science-fiction shows rose during the course of the 1950s, other Networks being 
inspired by the success the Video series had enjoyed with viewers.

ABC's own attempt to cash in on the success of Captain Video was a small screen 
version of "Buck Rogers", which had already proved to be a huge success as a film
serial in the cinemas. Running from 1950 until just the following year, ABC's 
Buck Rogers starred Kem Dibbs and later Robert Pastene in the lead role, and 
like its DuMont counterpart was the victim of a very small budget, which 
restricted most of the action to one single laboratory set, hardly the most 
thrilling of situations for the young viewers being targeted.

Another former film series and comic book character who was resurrected for the 
small screen during the 1950s was "Flash Gordon", who as played by Steve Holland 
was the star of thirty-nine episodes of a syndicated television series which ran
foragain just one year, from 1953 to 1954.

Gradually, television producers began to realise that there was just as much of 
an appetite for science fiction amongst adult audiences as there was amongst the
young, potentially even more so. Possibly inspired by the boom of literary 
science fiction by the likes of Isaac Asimov which was beginning to take place, 
or by the rise of the allegorical science-fiction movies that permeated the 
decade, television began to cater for this perhaps more cerebral type of science
fiction viewer.

One of the stalwarts of science fiction television in its early decades was to 
be the anthology series, in which a completely new story would be presented with
each episode, with new actors, settings and situations, the only link being the 
producers, genre and the series title. The first really popular series of this 
kind was "Science Fiction Theatre", a syndicated series which ran for 
seventy-eight episodes between 1955 and 1957. "Science Fiction Theatre" was by no
means the most famous anthology programme to be produced in the US during the 
1950s, however. Two years after it had finished its run, a new programme in the 
same vein, but one which was to have far greater and longer-lasting success, 
began on the CBS Network. "The Twilight Zone", as the show was called, had begun 
life as a one-off pilot, commissioned after the success of a science-fiction 
episode of the general drama anthology series "Westinghouse-Desilu Playhouse".

In its original form, "The Twilight Zone" ran for six years, from September 1959 
until September 1965, clocking up an impressive one hundred and thirty-four 
half-hour episodes during that time. Presenting a vast array of different types 
of science-fiction and horror stories, it created many memorable episodes, the 
imagery of which still linger in the American popular consciousness to this day,
and the theme tune of the series has gone on to become an internationally 
recognisable icon.

This was very much the bedrock of the more grown-up, adult science fiction 
programmes which would be presented to the audience during the sixties, shot on 
film as was now almost standard for all American non-live television programmes,
well-producedand with interesting, imaginative ideas. Perhaps the most famous 
episode is the 1963 instalment "Nightmare at 20,000 Feet", which starred a young 
William Shatner as a man convinced there is a hideous monster lurking on the 
wing of the aeroplane in which he is travelling, but which nobody else can see.

That "The Twilight Zone" had a far-reaching impact is undeniable: aside from 
launching the career of Shatner who would go on to become a science fiction icon
himself in another show, it has spawned a film version and a revival series 
during the 1980s, and was doubtless the inspiration behind ABC's decision in 
1963 to launch their own science fiction anthology, the equally iconic "The Outer
Limits". Although"The Outer Limits" was to have a much shorter run, finishing in 
1965, it was to prove just as famous and influential, and like its CBS 
contemporary had an only moderately successful revival decades later.

The years 1964 and 1965 were to prove an important period in the history of US 
television science fiction. They saw the conception of two brand new 'space 
opera'-based science fiction shows, both featuring broadly similar themes of 
galactic exploration, although dealt with in vastly different manners. The first
of these to reach the screens was the new CBS show "Lost in Space", which ran for 
three seasons from 1965 to 1968 and was from the stable of producer Irwin Allen.

Allen, who later went on to produce the famous 1970s disaster movie "The Towering
Inferno", produced a whole range of popular science fiction series on American 
television during the 1960s. These included "Land of the Giants", "The Time 
Tunnel" and "Voyage to the Bottom of the Sea", all involving futuristic, 
scientific concepts played out as the background to glossily produced action" 
adventure shows. Critics of Allen's output often argue that it is all rather 
soulless and shallow, but as mass-produced entertainment it proved popular with 
American and international audiences.

The second show to come out of this period, with an unscreened pilot made in 
1964 before the series proper began in 1966, and one that would leave a 
longer-lasting and more meaningful science-fiction legacy, in some ways changing
the face of the genre across all media, was called "Star Trek". Conceived by the 
producer Gene Roddenberry, "Star Trek" was seen as a show that would depict a 
future of galactic exploration and struggle, with all creeds and colours of 
humanity working together to explore the stars in a similar manner to the 
pioneers of the old West in America. Produced by Paramount for the NBC Network, 
Roddenberry's original 1964 pilot for "Star Trek", called "The Cage" and starring 
Jeffrey Hunter as Captain Christopher Pike, was regarded as being too 
intellectual and slow-moving by the network: however, they had sufficient faith 
in the ideas behind the programme to commission a second pilot, which replaced 
the character of Pike and all but one of the rest of his crew with the new crew 
commanded by Captain James T. Kirk, played by William Shatner.

In this new form, "Star Trek" ran for three years until 1969, although it was 
never a huge ratings hit and stopped two years short of its planned five year 
run. Only a fan campaign had prevented it from being cancelled after the second 
season, but despite this apparent unpopularity, the show had a special quality 
to it that attracted a loyal fanbase, and during syndication of the programme in
the early 1970s it proved to have an enduring popularity that would not go away.
An animated series was commissioned, and eventually in the late 1970s a sequel 
series, Star Trek: Phase Two was planned and work begun. However, after the 
success of "Star Wars" in the cinema, Paramount scrapped the idea of a new series
and decided instead upon launching "Star Trek" as a film franchise. "Star Trek" 
would return to the small screen in a new form in due course, but not until 
1987, some eighteen years after its original cancellation.

Aside from repeats of Star Trek gathering popularity in syndication, the early 
1970s proved to be something of a low ebb for television science fiction in the 
US. Very few series of any great note or popularity were produced, and few if 
any from this period are remembered today.

It was not until later in the decade, again inspired by the post-"Star Wars" 
boom of 1977 and beyond, that science fiction series began to return to 
prominence. One of those particularly keen on exploiting the Networks' new 
interest in the genre was producer Glen A. Larson, who created two new science 
fiction series in quick succession: another television version of Buck Rogers, 
this time entitled "Buck Rogers in the 25th Century" (1979-81) and his own 
original creation "Battlestar Galactica" (1978-80).

Both of these series had much in common---they were glossily produced on high 
budgets, with pilot episodes that were released theatrically into cinemas in 
some territories. However, both series seemed to place an emphasis on style over
content, with the scripts generally being run of-the-mill action/adventure 
affairs with few of the more challenging concepts of science fiction that had 
marked out their predecessors. It is perhaps for this reason that both 
programmes were so short lived, although they did attract highly dedicated and 
vociferous fan bases and do still linger to a certain extent in the popular 
consciousness.

The most significant US science fiction television series of the early 1980s was
the 1983 mini-series V, which aired on the NBC network. An allegorical tale 
paralleling the rise of the Nazis in Germany of the 1930s with the arrival on 
Earth of an apparently friendly alien race with hidden motives, the mini-series 
proved to be highly popular and iconic, spawning both a sequel "The Final Battle"
the following year, then a full-blown television series for the 1984-85 season, 
although neither of these were as successful as the original, being more 
action-orientated and somewhat less cerebral.

1987 saw the arrival of what is perhaps the most successful, in terms of sales 
and worldwide viewing figures, science fiction series of all time, Gene 
Roddenberry's re-launching of his Star Trek franchise, "Star Trek: The Next 
Generation". Taking place on a new starship "Enterprise" some seventy years after
the events of the original series, unlike its predecessor it was not supported by
a network, but instead sold directly into syndication. The programme was a huge 
success, running for seven seasons and like the original series spawning several
feature film spin-offs.

It also led to further "Star Trek" series which took place within the same time 
frame, firstly "Star Trek: Deep Space Nine" (1993-99) and later "Star Trek: 
Voyager" (1994-2001). The only series currently running in the franchise is 
UPN's "Star Trek: Enterprise", a prequel to the original series which has been 
running since 2001. All of these series have helped affirm the iconic status of 
the "Star Trek" franchise, but as well as this they helped lead to a science 
fiction boom of the 1990s, as many networks and production companies sought to 
make their own shows in a genre which had shown itself to be incredibly popular 
and profitable again.

Although there were many run-of-the-mill series that did not get past a single 
season, this boom decade for science-fiction produced many intelligently 
written, creative, imaginative shows that have in a very short period of time 
been able to establish themselves in the popular consciousness of television 
viewers not just in the US, but worldwide as well.

There were epic space operas such as "Babylon 5" (1993-98), time-travel and 
dimension-hopping series in the vein of "Quantum Leap" (1989-93) and "Sliders" 
(1995-2000), and mysterious conspiracy thrillers such as "The X-Files" 
(1993-2002). The latter series in particular enshrined itself within the pop 
culture of a generation in a manner in which few television series are able, and
the entire decade produced a rich vein of highly successful science fiction 
shows, the popularity and creativity of which has rarely been equalled by so 
many programmes in such a short space of time.

At the turn of the century, however, a change began in the type of telefantasy 
programme that was popular with the viewing masses. Most of the genre 
programming to be found on the Networks was horror or fantasy based rather than 
science-fiction as such: there was perhaps a sense that audiences were tired of 
science-fiction, and sought other types of programmes. Thus the rise to 
popularity of such shows as "Buffy the Vampire Slayer", its spin off "Angel" and 
the stylistically similar "Charmed". All of these were set in the real world of 
the present day, but involved fantastical and horrific threats to the central 
characters, and possessed a wit and self-awareness that had perhaps been lacking
insome of their more po-faced science-fiction predecessors.

Nonetheless, the popularity of science fiction as a genre means that several 
notable programmes are still on-going. "Stargate SG-1" has aired since 1997, and 
is somewhat unique in being a successful spin-off series from the 1994 movie. 
The aforementioned "Star Trek: Enterprise" has reached its fourth season, and 
recently the Sci-Fi Channel aired a mini-series based on the original "Battlestar
Galactica",which proved so successful for them that it is to run to a full 
thirteen episode season from January 2005.

So it seems that whatever the trends and fashions in television, science fiction
asa genre has firmly established its place in the make-up of American 
programming, and with the sheer number of networks and production companies 
operating in that country, there will always be some new genre content being 
produced and aired somewhere in the US.

Other television science fiction

Although the US and the UK have produced the bulk of the world's most famous 
television science-fiction shows, the popularity of the genre insures that just 
about every country which produced television drama has produced some sci-fi at 
some point. The Australian/American production "Farscape" has been a popular hit
in recent years, as have other Australian science-fiction productions such as the
1990s'children's serial "The Girl From Tomorrow". The quirky sci-fi show "Lexx" 
garnered a huge cult following in the late 1990s and early 2000s, and was a 
German/Canadian co-production. Japan has produced a huge amount of sci-fi 
themed anime, as well as other productions such as the popular early 1980s 
sci-fi puppet show "Star Fleet".
</TEXT>
