<TITLE>The Avengers (television)</TITLE>
<TOPIC>The Avengers</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>television</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>science fiction</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>television series</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>film</TOPIC>
<TEXT>
"The Avengers" is a British 1960s television series featuring secret agents in a
fantasy 1960s Britain. The programmes were made by TV company Associated British
Corporation.

Patrick Macnee played secret agent John Steed throughout the series, complete 
with bowler hat and umbrella (both of which turn out to be full of tricks). In 
the first series Steed was himself a secondary character, the protagonist being 
Dr. David Keel (Ian Hendry)--all but two of these episodes are now lost. "The 
Avengers" was a successor (but not, as sometimes stated, a direct sequel) to 
Hendry's earlier series "Police Surgeon", in which he played a similar character.

In subsequent series, Steed is accompanied by a female partner, in chronological
order: Cathy Gale (Honor Blackman), Mrs. Emma Peel (Diana Rigg), and Tara King 
(Linda Thorson).

The classic "Avengers" episodes are generally considered to be those featuring 
Macnee and Rigg. This era was characterised by a futuristic, science fiction 
bend to many of the tales, with mad scientists and their creations causing havoc
in their wake. However, earlier eras of the show had a much more hard-edged tone,
with the Blackman episodes including some surprisingly serious espionage dramas
(when viewed through the prism of the later, better-known period). Steed and his
associate were charged with solving the problem in the space of an hour-long 
episode and thus preserved the safety of 1960s Britain on a regular basis. There
was also a notable fetishistic undercurrent in many episodes (most notably the 
B&W Rigg episode "A Touch of Brimstone", in which Mrs. Peel, dressed as a 
dominatrix, becomes the "Queen of Sin"), and Macnee and Blackman released a 
novelty song called "Kinky Boots". (Some of the clothes seen in "The Avengers" 
were designed by the clothing designer John Sutcliffe, who also published 
the "AtomAge" fetish magazine).

The arrival of Rigg coincided with the show's sale to US television. Previously 
the series had been shot on 405-line videotape, with very little provision for 
editing and virtually no location footage. This meant that to all intents and 
purposes the Blackman episodes were shot live in the studio. Many of these 
episodes were wiped; those that survive are in the form of 16mm film 
telerecordings.

The US deal meant that the producers could afford to shoot the series on 35mm 
film. In any case, the change was essential because British videotapes were 
incompatible with US standards. The transfer to film meant that episodes could 
be shot like movies, giving the show much greater flexibility. After two filmed 
seasons in black and white,"The Avengers" began filming in colour in 1967, 
although it would be two years before British viewers could see it that way.

In the 1970s the series was revived as "The New Avengers", with Macnee reprising 
his role as Steed, this time with two new partners, Mike Gambit (Gareth Hunt) 
and Purdey (Joanna Lumley). This time the series was produced independently by 
original series producers Brian Clemens and Albert Fennell, with French and 
later Canadian backing. Two seasons totalling 26 episodes were produced.

A recent newspaper report suggested that Macnee himself was responsible for 
tracking down the original negatives of both series for remastering, because he 
was tired of seeing inferior copies. If this is true, he is to be congratulated,
especially since there seems to be no financial incentive.

A 1990s movie based on Rigg and Macnee's characters from the TV series, starring
Uma Thurman and Ralph Fiennes respectively, received poor reviews. The original 
British poster showed Fiennes and Thurman accompanied by the caption: "He's 
Steed. She's Mrs. Peel." The frequent and inevitable response was, "No they're 
not! Patrick Macnee and Diana Rigg are Steed and Mrs. Peel!" "The Avengers" 
series five title sequence was lovingly parodied in the title sequence for "In 
Bed With Medinner".
</TEXT>
