<TITLE>Mathematics</TITLE>
<TOPIC>Mathematics</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>Math</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>Maths</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>science</TOPIC>
<TEXT>
Mathematics is commonly defined as the study of patterns of structure, change, 
and space; more informally, one might say it is the study of 'figures and 
numbers'. In the formalist view, it is the investigation of axiomatically 
defined abstract structures using logic and mathematical notation; other views 
are described in Philosophy of mathematics. Mathematics might be seen as a 
simple extension of spoken and written languages, with an extremely precisely 
defined vocabulary and grammar, for the purpose of describing and exploring 
physical and conceptual relationships.

Although mathematics itself is not usually considered a natural science, the 
specific structures that are investigated by mathematicians often have their 
origin in the natural sciences, most commonly in physics. However, 
mathematicians also define and investigate structures for reasons purely 
internal to mathematics, because the structures may provide, for instance, a 
unifying generalization for several subfields, or a helpful tool for common 
calculations. Finally, many mathematicians study the areas they do for purely 
aesthetic reasons, viewing mathematics as an art form rather than as a practical
orapplied science. Some mathematicians like to refer to their subject as "the 
Queen of Sciences".

Mathematics is often abbreviated to math (in American English) or maths (in 
British English).

Overview and history of mathematics -- See the article on the history of 
mathematics for details.

The word "mathematics" comes from the Greek (/máthema/) which means "science, 
knowledge, or learning"; (/mathematikós/) means "fond of learning".

The major disciplines within mathematics arose out of the need to do 
calculations in commerce, to measure land and to predict astronomical events. 
These three needs can be roughly related to the broad subdivision of mathematics
into the study of structure, space and change.

The study of structure starts with numbers, first the familiar natural numbers 
and integers and their arithmetical operations, which are recorded in elementary
algebra. The deeper properties of whole numbers are studied in number theory. The
investigation of methods to solve equations leads to the field of abstract 
algebra, which, among other things, studies rings and fields, structures that 
generalize the properties possessed by the familiar numbers. The physically 
important concept of vectors, generalized to vector spaces and studied in linear
algebra, belongs to the two branches of structure and space.

The study of space originates with geometry, first the Euclidean geometry and 
trigonometry of familiar three-dimensional space (also applying to both more and
less dimensions), later also generalized to non-Euclidean geometries which play a
central role in general relativity. Several long standing questions about ruler 
and compass constructions were finally settled by Galois theory. The modern 
fields of differential geometry and algebraic geometry generalize geometry in 
different directions: differential geometry emphasizes the concepts of 
functions, fiber bundles, derivatives, smoothness and direction, while in 
algebraic geometry geometrical objects are described as solution sets of 
polynomial equations. Group theory investigates the concept of symmetry 
abstractly and provides a link between the studies of space and structure. 
Topology connects the study of space and the study of change by focusing on the 
concept of continuity.

Understanding and describing change in measurable quantities is the common theme
of the natural sciences, and calculus was developed as a most useful tool for 
doing just that. The central concept used to describe a changing variable is 
that of a function. Many problems lead quite naturally to relations between a 
quantity and its rate of change, and the methods to solve these are studied in 
the field of differential equations. The numbers used to represent continuous 
quantities are the real numbers, and the detailed study of their properties and 
the properties of real-valued functions is known as real analysis. For several 
reasons, it is convenient to generalise to the complex numbers which are 
studied in complex analysis. Functional analysis focuses attention on (typically 
infinite-dimensional) spaces of functions, laying the groundwork for quantum 
mechanics among many other things. Many phenomena in nature can be described by 
dynamical systems and chaos theory deals with the fact that many of these 
systems exhibit unpredictable yet deterministic behavior.

In order to clarify and investigate the foundations of mathematics, the fields 
of set theory, mathematical logic and model theory were developed.

When computers were first conceived, several essential theoretical concepts were
shaped by mathematicians, leading to the fields of computability theory, 
computational complexity theory, information theory and algorithmic information 
theory. Many of these questions are now investigated in theoretical computer 
science. Discrete mathematics is the common name for those fields of mathematics
useful in computer science.

An important field in applied mathematics is statistics, which uses probability 
theory as a tool and allows the description, analysis and prediction of 
phenomena and is used in all sciences. Numerical analysis investigates the 
methods of efficiently solving various mathematical problems numerically on 
computers and takes rounding errors into account.

Topics in mathematics

An alphabetical and subclassified list of mathematical topics is available. The 
following list of subfields and topics reflects one organizational view of 
mathematics.

Quantity

In general, these topics and ideas present explicit measurements of sizes of 
numbers or sets, or ways to find such measurements.

Number -- Natural number -- Pi-- Integers -- Rational numbers-- Real numbers -- 
Complexnumbers -- Hypercomplex numbers-- Quaternions -- Octonions -- Sedenions 
-- Hyperreal numbers -- Surreal numbers-- Ordinal numbers -- Cardinal numbers 
-- /p/-adic numbers-- Integer sequences -- Mathematical constants -- Number names
-- Infinity -- Base

Change

These topics give ways to measure change in mathematical functions, and changes 
between numbers.

Arithmetic -- Calculus -- Vector calculus -- Analysis-- Differential equations--
Dynamicalsystems and chaos theory-- List of functions

Structure

These branches of mathematics measure size and symmetry of numbers, and various 
constructs.

Abstract algebra -- Number theory-- Algebraic geometry-- Group theory-- Monoids 
-- Analysis -- Topology -- Linear algebra -- Graph theory-- Universal algebra 
-- Category theory -- Order theory

Space

These topics tend to quantify a more visual approach to mathematics than others.

Topology -- Geometry -- Trigonometry -- Algebraic geometry-- Differential 
geometry-- Differential topology-- Algebraic topology-- Linear algebra 
-- Fractal geometry 

Discrete mathematics

Topics in discrete mathematics deal with branches of mathematics with objects 
that can only take on specific, separated values.

Combinatorics -- Naive set theory-- Probability -- Theory of computation -- 
Finite mathematics-- Cryptography -- Graph theory -- Game theory 


Applied mathematics

Fields in applied mathematics use knowledge of mathematics to real world 
problems.

Mechanics -- Numerical analysis-- Optimization-- Probability-- Statistics -- 
Financial mathematics 


Famous theorems and conjectures

These theorems have interested mathematicians and non-mathematicians alike.

Fermat's last theorem -- Goldbach's conjecture -- Twin Prime Conjecture-- 
Gödel's incompleteness theorems-- Poincaré conjecture-- Cantor's diagonal 
argument---- Four color theorem-- Zorn's lemma -- Euler's identity -- Scholz 
Conjecture-- Church-Turing thesis

Important theorems

These are theorems that have changed the face of mathematics throughout history.

Riemann hypothesis -- Continuum hypothesis -- P=NP-- Pythagorean theorem-- 
Central limit theorem-- Fundamental theorem of calculus-- Fundamental theorem of
algebra -- Fundamental theorem of arithmetic --Fundamental theorem of 
projective geometry-- classification theorems of surfaces -- Gauss-Bonnet theorem 

Foundations and methods

Such topics are approaches to mathematics, and influence the way mathematicians 
study their subject.

Philosophy of mathematics -- Mathematical intuitionism -- Mathematical 
constructivism -- Foundations of mathematics -- Set theory -- Symbolic logic 
-- Model theory -- Category theory-- Theorem-proving -- Logic -- Reverse 
Mathematics-- Table of mathematical symbols


History and the world of mathematicians

History of mathematics -- Timeline of mathematics -- Mathematicians-- Fields 
medal -- Abel Prize -- Millennium Prize Problems (Clay Math Prize) -- 
International Mathematical Union -- Mathematics competitions -- Lateral thinking

Mathematics and other fields

Mathematics and architecture -- Mathematics and education-- Mathematics of 
musical scales 

Mathematical tools

Old:

Abacus 
Napier's bones, Slide Rule 
Ruler and Compass 
Mental calculation 
 
New:

Calculators and computers 
Programming languages 
Computer algebra systems (listing) 
Internet shorthand notation 
statistical analysis software
   o SPSS 
   o SAS 

Quotes

Referring to the axiomatic method, where certain properties of an (otherwise 
unknown) structure are assumed and consequences thereof are then logically 
derived, Bertrand Russell said: "Mathematics may be defined as the subject in 
which we never know what we are talking about, nor whether what we are saying is
true." This may explain why John Von Neumann once said: "In mathematics you don't
understand things. You just get used to them."

About the beauty of Mathematics, Bertrand Russell said in "Study of 
Mathematics":"Mathematics, rightly viewed, possesses not only truth, but supreme
beauty-- a beauty cold and austere, like that of sculpture, without appeal to 
any part of our weaker nature, without the gorgeous trappings of painting or 
music, yet sublimely pure, and capable of a stern perfection such as only the 
greatest art can show. The true spirit of delight, the exaltation, the sense of 
being more than Man, which is the touchstone of the highest excellence, is to be
foundin mathematics as surely as poetry."

Elucidating the symmetry between the creative and logical aspects of 
mathematics, W.S. Anglin observed, in "Mathematics and History":"Mathematics is 
not a careful march down a well-cleared highway, but a journey into a strange 
wilderness, where the explorers often get lost. Rigour should be a signal to the
historianthat the maps have been made, and the real explorers have gone 
elsewhere."

Mathematics is not...

    Numerology 
    Accountancy 


Bibliography

Courant, R. and H. Robbins, "What Is Mathematics?" (1941); 
Davis, Philip J. and Hersh, Reuben, "The Mathematical Experience". Birkhäuser, 
    Boston, Mass., 1980. A gentle introduction to the world of mathematics. 
Gullberg, Jan,"Mathematics--From the Birth of Numbers". W.W. Norton, 1996. An 
    encyclopedic overview of mathematics presented in clear, simple language. 
Hazewinkel, Michiel (ed.),"Encyclopaedia of Mathematics". Kluwer Academic 
    Publishers 2000. A translated and expanded version of a Soviet math 
    encyclopedia, in ten (expensive) volumes, the most complete and authoritative
    work available. Also in paperback and on CD-ROM. 
Kline, M., "Mathematical Thought from Ancient to Modern Times" (1973);
</TEXT>
