<TITLE>Beauty and the Beast</TITLE>
<TOPIC>Beauty and the Beast</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>film</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>Disney</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>animation</TOPIC>
<TOPIC>cel animation</TOPIC>
<TEXT>
"Beauty and the Beast" is a traditional folktale (type 425C-- search for a lost 
husband-- in the Aarne-Thompson classification). The first published version of
the fairy tale was a meandering rendition by Madame Gabrielle-Suzanne Barbot de 
Villeneuve, published in "La jeune ameriquaine, et les contes marins" in 1740. 
The best-known written version was an abridgement of M. Villeneuve's work 
published in 1756 by Mme Jeanne-Marie Leprince de Beaumont, in "Magasin des 
enfans, ou dialogues entre une sage gouvernante et plusieure de ses èleves"; an 
English translation appeared in 1757.

Similar tales include the story of "Cupid and Psyche", and Madame D'Aulnoy's "Le 
Mouton" (The Ram).

Plot summary

Beauty's father, caught in a storm, finds shelter in the Beast's palace. As he 
leaves, he plucks a rose to bring back to Beauty, offending his unseen host, who
tells him he must now die. The father begs to be allowed to see his daughters 
again: the Beast says that if one of the man's daughters will return to suffer 
in his place, he may live. Beauty journeys to the Beast's castle, convinced she 
will be killed: instead, she is made mistress of the enchanted palace, and the 
Beast asks her to be his wife. She says she can be his friend, and will stay 
with him forever, but not as his wife, asking only to return to her home for a 
week to say farewell to her father. Her sisters entice her to stay beyond the 
allotted week, and she returns belatedly to the castle, finding the Beast lying 
near death from distress at her failure to return. She begs him to live, so that
he may be her husband, and by this act the Beast is transformed into a handsome 
prince.

Movie versions

A sumptuous French version of "Beauty and the Beast" ("La Belle et la Bête") was 
made in 1946, directed by Jean Cocteau, starring his lover Jean Marais as "the 
Beast" and Josette Day as "Beauty". The score was by Georges Auric. The film is 
notable for its surreal quality and its ability to use existing movie technology
to effectively evoke a feeling of magic and enchantment. In 1995 composer Philip 
Glass composed an opera meant as an alternative "soundtrack" to the movie, and 
some DVDs offer the ability to view the movie while listening to either version.

In 1991 Disney produced an animated film of "Beauty and the Beast" with 
screenplay by Linda Woolverton, music by Alan Menken, and lyrics by Howard 
Ashman. It won Academy Awards for Best Song and Best Original Score and was the 
first animated feature ever nominated for a Best Picture Oscar. This version 
gave Beauty a name (Belle), but not the Beast. It is now considered one of the 
Walt Disney Company's"classics".

Stage Versions

The Disney film was adapted for the stage by Linda Woolverton and Alan Menken, 
who had worked on the film. Howard Ashman, the original lyricist, had died, and 
additional lyrics were written by Tim Rice. Five new songs, "No Matter What",
"Home", "Me", and "If I Can't Love Her", and "Human Again" were added to 
those appearing in the original film score in the stage version. There is a 
great deal of emphasis on pyrotechnics, costuming and special effects to produce
the imagery of the enchanted castle.

Television Versions

"Beauty and the Beast", which owed as much to bodice-ripping romance novels and 
fantasy fiction as to the fairy tale, originally broadcast from 1987 to 1989, was
centered around the relationship between Catherine, an attorney who lived in New
York City, played by Linda Hamilton, and Vincent, a gentle but lion-faced "beast",
played by Ron Perlman, who dwells in the tunnels beneath the city.
</TEXT>
